PRODUCT REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT

AI Development
Capacity
& Design Generation
Engine

Codename ENVELOPE -- Version 2.0

Codename: ENVELOPE Supersedes: PRD V1 (retained for reference; its worked examples
are withdrawn as arithmetically invalid) Version: 2.0 Status: For build Change basis:
Red-team review. Product vision unchanged; delivery restructured into six phases; fifteen
specific corrections applied and tracked in §29.3.

Dubai · Residential Towers · Phased delivery, Phase 0 through Phase 5
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                     v2.0

Contents

Reading guide · 6

1. Product Vision · 7
       1.1 The vision is unchanged · 7
       1.2 What changed in V2 · 7
       1.3 The layering, stated as dependency rather than sequence · 7

2. Product Strategy · 8
       2.1 Strategic position · 8
       2.2 The three claims the product must never conflate · 8
       2.3 Phase gating · 8
       2.4 Non-negotiable product principles · 9

3. PHASE 0 -- Proof of Engine · 10
       3.1 Goal · 10
       3.2 Scope · 10
       3.3 Why no LLM in Phase 0 · 10
       3.4 Phase 0 output -- what a user receives · 10
       3.5 Phase 0 success criteria · 11

4. PHASE 1 -- Development Configuration Engine · 12
       4.1 Goal · 12
       4.2 Additions · 12
       4.3 Deliberately still absent · 12
       4.4 Phase 1 success criteria · 12

5. PHASE 2 -- Precedent Intelligence · 13
       5.1 Goal · 13
       5.2 Two acquisition paths, planned in parallel · 13
       5.3 Deliverables · 13
       5.4 The realistic capacity band -- entry condition · 13
       5.5 Phase 2 success criteria · 14

6. PHASE 3 -- AI Document Understanding · 15
       6.1 Goal · 15
       6.2 Scope · 15
       6.3 The mandatory pipeline -- no exceptions · 15
       6.4 Deterministic-first extraction · 15
       6.5 Extraction confidence -- the labelling rule · 15
       6.6 Phase 3 success criteria · 16

7. PHASE 4 -- AI Generation · 17
       7.1 Goal · 17
       7.2 Scope · 17
       7.3 The generation contract · 17
       7.4 Fidelity ceiling · 17
       7.5 Geometry restriction lift · 17
       7.6 Phase 4 gate -- pre-authorized deferral · 17

8. PHASE 5 -- Full Optimization · 18
       8.1 Entry condition · 18

Confidential -- internal working document                               2
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                   v2.0

       8.2 Scope · 18
       8.3 "Where justified" · 18
       8.4 The performance problem, costed honestly · 18
       8.5 Phase 5 success criteria · 18

9. Functional Requirements · 19
       9.1 Phase 0 -- Foundations · 19
       9.2 Phase 1 -- Configurations · 25
       9.3 Phase 2 -- Precedent · 27
       9.4 Phase 3 -- Extraction · 28
       9.5 Phases 4­5 -- Generation and Optimization · 29
       9.6 Governance (all phases) · 30

10. Data Model · 32
       10.1 Design principles · 32
       10.2 Core entities · 33
       10.3 What changed from V1 · 33

11. Rule Model · 35
       11.1 Typed records, not a DSL · 35
       11.2 Rule record · 35
       11.3 The three rule classes · 35
       11.4 Evaluator registry (Phase 0, 12) · 36
       11.5 Overlap resolution -- scalar parameters · 36
       11.6 Non-scalar conflict handling · 36
       11.7 Circular dependencies -- the occupant-load fixpoint · 37

12. Invariant Model · 38
       12.1 Why this layer exists · 38
       12.2 Invariant catalogue · 38
       12.3 Independence and enforcement · 38
       12.4 What invariants are not · 39

13. Provenance Model · 40
       13.1 Provenance classes · 40
       13.2 Graph shape · 40
       13.3 CI-asserted invariants on provenance · 40
       13.4 Immutable run reproducibility · 40

14. Geometry Model · 42
       14.1 Phase 0 restriction · 42
       14.2 Operations required in Phase 0 · 42
       14.3 Numerical policy · 42
       14.4 Coordinate handling · 42
       14.5 Deferred to Phase 4 · 42

15. Capacity Model · 43
       15.1 Five distinct capacity concepts (Principle 6) · 43
       15.2 Governing capacity · 43
       15.3 What is deliberately absent · 43
       15.4 Integer granularity · 43

16. Validation Model · 44
       16.1 Three constraint categories · 44
       16.2 Contradiction battery (Phase 1) · 44
       16.3 Independence · 44

Confidential -- internal working document                             3
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                         v2.0

       16.4 The honest limit of independence · 44
       16.5 The five-way claim statement · 44

17. Historical Precedent Model · 46
       17.1 Precedent record and tiering · 46
       17.2 Precedent is evidence, never authority · 46
       17.3 What precedent is for, in priority order · 46
       17.4 Similarity measurement -- the definition · 46

18. AI Architecture · 48
       18.1 The deterministic / AI boundary · 48
       18.2 The invariant · 48
       18.3 Design-space distinctness (not objective-space) · 48
       18.4 Why not end-to-end generative · 48

19. Technical Architecture · 50
       19.1 Phase 0 architecture · 50
       19.2 Explicitly removed from Phase 0 · 50
       19.3 Retained from V1 because retrofitting is a rewrite · 51
       19.4 Stack by phase · 51

20. UX Flow · 52
       20.1 Phase 0 flow · 52
       20.2 The three moments that carry the product · 52
       20.3 Uncertainty as a first-class visual state · 52
       20.4 Role lenses (Phase 1) · 52

21. Human Approval Gates · 53
       21.1 Run gates · 53
       21.2 Shared asset gates (Principle 10) · 53

22. Evaluation Framework · 54
       22.1 Layers · 54
       22.2 The inter-architect variance measurement -- do this first · 54
       22.3 Metrics that are absolute · 54
       22.4 Metrics that must be paired · 55

23. Golden Dataset · 56
       23.1 Composition (Phase 0) · 56
       23.2 Why two architects, not one · 56
       23.3 The circularity, acknowledged · 56
       23.4 Rule test requirements · 56

24. MVP Acceptance Criteria · 57
       24.1 Functional · 57
       24.2 Quality · 57
       24.3 Measurement deliverables (equal weight to the software) · 57
       24.4 Governance · 57

25. Risk Register · 59

26. Kill / Re-scope Criteria · 61

27. Open Questions · 62

28. Data Acquisition Plan · 63
       28.1 By phase · 63
       28.2 Minimum viable precedent dataset (Phase 2) · 63

Confidential -- internal working document                                   4
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2              v2.0

       28.3 What to ask a municipality for, in order · 63
       28.4 Licensing discipline · 64

29. Corrections Applied from Red Team · 65

Appendix A -- Worked Example (Invariant-Verified) · 66
       A.1 Inputs · 66
       A.2 Envelope · 66
       A.3 Capacity bands · 67
       A.4 Configuration · 67
       A.5 Parking · 68
       A.6 Assumption register (top 3 by sensitivity) · 68
       A.7 Invariant results · 68
       A.8 Five-way claim statement for this example · 69

30. WHAT WE KNOW · 70
       30.1 Regulatory and jurisdictional · 70
       30.2 Data availability · 70
       30.3 Verified by our own computation · 70
       30.4 Technical facts · 70

31. WHAT WE ARE ASSUMING · 72
       31.1 Dangerous -- test in Phase 0 · 72
       31.2 Significant -- test in Phases 1­2 · 72
       31.3 Structural -- carried, monitored · 72
       31.4 The assumptions V1 made silently, now surfaced · 73

32. Phase 0 Implementation Plan (8­12 weeks) · 74
       32.1 Team -- four people · 74
       32.2 Schedule · 74
       32.3 Critical path · 75
       32.4 What Phase 0 delivers beyond software · 75

33. Roadmap V1 / V2 / V3 · 76

34. One-Page Brief for the CEO · 77
       Why Phase 0 is not "building a calculator" · 77

Confidential -- internal working document                        5
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

Reading guide

Priorities: P0 blocks the phase · P1 required for phase completion, degradable · P2 next phase · P3
later.

Provenance classes used throughout: DERIVED (from a cited rule) · ASSUMED (declared default) ·
USER_SET · OBSERVED (from precedent, Phase 2+) · TRADEOFF (optimizer choice, Phase 5).

Two labels appear frequently and mean exactly what they say: - OPEN REGULATORY QUESTION -- we do
not know the answer and have not invented one. The system asks the user and records their answer
as USER_SET . - HEURISTIC -- a number produced by a method we have not calibrated. Never
displayed without the label.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                            6
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                               v2.0

1. Product Vision

1.1 The vision is unchanged

An AI Development Capacity Engine that answers, for a specific plot:

    Given this plot, its regulations, the developer's standards, the project brief, and relevant
    approved precedents -- what is the best development configuration that can legally and
    commercially be built here?

The long-term pipeline remains exactly as conceived:

    PLOT  REGULATIONS  DEVELOPER STANDARDS  RFP  HISTORICAL PRECEDENTS
              GENERATE  OPTIMIZE  VALIDATE  ARCHITECTURAL OUTPUTS
              EXPLAIN

The product is not a compliance checker. Validation is the mechanism that bounds generation, not
the deliverable. The product works before architectural design exists.

1.2 What changed in V2

Nothing about the destination. Everything about the order of arrival.

V1 attempted to build the pipeline as one system. V2 builds it as six layers, each of which is
independently testable, independently sellable, and each of which cannot be safely built before
the layer beneath it is proven. The reason is not caution for its own sake -- it is that every upper
layer's correctness is defined in terms of the lower layer's outputs. You cannot evaluate whether a
generated massing is good until you can compute, exactly and defensibly, what volume it is allowed
to occupy. You cannot calibrate a precedent-based estimate until you have a deterministic estimate
to calibrate against. You cannot review an AI-extracted rule until you have a rule model to review it
into.

1.3 The layering, stated as dependency rather than sequence

Phase 5  OPTIMIZATION     needs a generator whose outputs are trustworthy
         GENERATION       needs constraints that are both checkable and constructive
         AI EXTRACTION    needs a rule model to extract INTO, and a review workflow
Phase 4  PRECEDENT        needs a deterministic baseline to calibrate AGAINST
         CONFIGURATIONS   needs a capacity engine to configure WITHIN
         CAPACITY ENGINE  needs nothing but geometry, rules, and arithmetic
Phase 3
     

Phase 2
     

Phase 1
     

Phase 0

Each arrow is a hard technical dependency, not a preference. This is the entire argument of V2.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                              7
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                                 v2.0

2. Product Strategy

2.1 Strategic position

Core asset           Statement
                     A versioned, cited, human-approved, machine-executable model of Dubai development regulation,
Wedge                plus a deterministic geometry engine that can construct from it, not merely check against it.
Expansion            Defensible capacity in minutes, with every number traceable.
Moat, ascending      Configurations  precedent intelligence  document automation  generation  optimization.
durability           Typology library < precedent corpus < executable rule base < approval-outcome feedback loop.
Non-moat
                     The LLM, the UI, the optimizer. All commodity.

2.2 The three claims the product must never conflate

This is a product-defining distinction and it appears in every output:

Claim                What it means                                                    Can we support it?
Self-consistency     The configuration satisfies the constraints we encoded, and its
                     arithmetic closes                                                Yes, from Phase 0
Rule coverage        The constraints we encoded are the ones that apply
                                                                                      Partially; quantified and
Professional         A qualified architect would produce a comparable answer          disclosed
agreement
Regulatory validity  The authority would approve it                                   Measured, not asserted
                                                                                      (§22)

                                                                                      Never claimed. Not
                                                                                      obtainable.

Non-negotiable Principle 7: the validator agreeing with the generator is self-consistency, nothing
more. No output, no report, no marketing material may describe it as compliance.

2.3 Phase gating

Each phase ships to real users before the next begins. Each phase has explicit kill/re-scope criteria
(§26). A phase that fails its criteria does not proceed on hope.

Phase  Name                                          Duration     Ships to
0      Proof of Engine                               8­12 weeks   1­2 design partners, free
1      Development Configuration Engine              10­14 weeks  3­5 paying customers
2      Precedent Intelligence                        12­16 weeks  Same, as upgrade
3      AI Document Understanding                     10­12 weeks  Same, reduces onboarding cost
4      AI Generation                                 16­20 weeks  Gated on architect panel
5      Full Optimization                             12­16 weeks  Gated on Phase 4

Cumulative to full vision: ~18­24 months. This is longer than V1's 11-month estimate and the
difference is honesty about the knowledge-authoring workstream and about the sequencing
dependencies above.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                           8
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                                      v2.0

2.4 Non-negotiable product principles

These carry forward from the brief, unchanged, and are enforced structurally rather than by policy.
Where enforcement is mechanical, the mechanism is named.

# Principle                                             Enforcement

1 Historical projects are precedent evidence, not       Type-level: PrecedentObservation cannot appear in a
       regulatory authority                             ConstraintSet derivation path. CI assertion.

2 Every important output traces to a rule, an           Provenance class is non-nullable on every emitted value. CI
       assumption, an objective, or a precedent         assertion.

3 Every emitted configuration passes an invariant/      §12. Fails the build and blocks emission.
       conservation layer

4 The invariant layer is independent of the generator   Separate module, separate owner, no shared imports. Import
                                                        linter.

5 Hard constraints separated from soft preferences      Distinct types; hard constraints are feasibility filters, never
                                                        penalty terms.

6 Five distinct capacity concepts, never merged         §15. Each has its own field and its own derivation.

7 Never claim compliance because the validator agrees §2.2. Report template makes the distinction structural.
       with the generator

8 Distinguish self-consistency, rule coverage, geometric §16.5 -- reported as five separate statements.
       validity, regulatory validity, professional agreement

9 Every rule carries source, citation, effective date,  Schema: all NOT NULL. §11.
       jurisdiction, applicability, version, approval,
       provenance

10 Shared assets are versioned and approval-controlled  §21. Rules, defaults, area definitions, typologies,
                                                        normalizations, deferred classifications.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                                9
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                           v2.0

3. PHASE 0 -- Proof of Engine

3.1 Goal

Prove that a deterministic engine can take a real Dubai residential-tower plot and produce a
buildable envelope and capacity calculation that falls within the disagreement band of two
practising architects, in seconds, with every number traceable.

Note the accuracy target is relative to human disagreement, not to an imaginary true value. If two
qualified architects differ by 6% on the same plot and the engine lands between them, the engine is
as good as the profession -- and it is faster, reproducible, and auditable, which is the product.

3.2 Scope

In: - One Dubai community, one land-use type, residential towers - Form-based plot input; manual
boundary drawing on a basemap - Rectilinear and simple convex polygon plots only - ~40
mechanized rules as typed records - Buildable envelope: per-edge setbacks, height, FAR, coverage,
tower plate cap - Parking demand  parking area  level count  podium implication - Three
capacity bands: regulation-limited, geometry-limited, parking-limited - User-entered realism
discount (a USER_SET multiplier, clearly not a system estimate) - Assumption register with
perturbation sensitivity - Full provenance graph, click-through - Invariant / conservation layer -
Independent validation module - JSON + PDF output

Out: LLM anything · optimization · multiple configurations · floor plans · precedent · similarity ·
jurisdiction overlays · DXF · realistic capacity band.

3.3 Why no LLM in Phase 0

Not because AI is deprecated in this product. Because:

 1. Extraction is not the risky part. Document extraction is a known, bounded engineering
     problem with commodity solutions. Capacity computation with defensible provenance is not.

 2. AI extraction has nothing to extract into until the rule model exists. Phase 3 depends on
     Phase 0's schema. Building extraction first means building it twice.

 3. A form takes 90 seconds. For 10 plots in one community, manual entry costs less than the
     extraction pipeline costs to debug.

 4. It isolates the variable. If Phase 0 fails, we need to know it failed on geometry and rules, not
     on OCR.

Phase 3 adds AI extraction on top of a proven rule model, with a review workflow that already has
somewhere to send candidates.

3.4 Phase 0 output -- what a user receives

 1. Buildable envelope (podium footprint, tower plate cap, height ceiling), with the binding
     constraint named for each dimension

 2. Three capacity bands with derivations
 3. Parking demand, area, level count, and headroom
 4. Applicable rules with citations, plus rules considered and excluded with reasons
 5. Assumption register, sensitivity-ranked
 6. Invariant check results
 7. Validation results, with the five-way claim distinction (§2.2)

Confidential -- internal working document                                                             10
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                               v2.0

8. Deferred-check list -- what was applicable but not assessed
9. PDF report + JSON

3.5 Phase 0 success criteria

#      Criterion                                                           Threshold
P0-S1  Inter-architect variance measured and published                     Measured (any value)
P0-S2  Engine result within the two-architect band                         8 of 10 plots
P0-S3  Every emitted value has a provenance class and complete derivation  100%
P0-S4  Invariant layer passes on all emitted configurations                100%
P0-S5  Runtime, full computation                                           < 10 s
P0-S6  Design-partner users open the provenance tree unprompted             2 of 3 sessions
P0-S7  Mechanization rate and authoring throughput measured                Measured and reported
P0-S8  Land-pack completeness rate measured                                Measured and reported

P0-S1, S7 and S8 are measurement criteria, not performance criteria. Phase 0's most valuable
output is not the software -- it is four numbers that size the rest of the business (§26).

Confidential -- internal working document                                                         11
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                      v2.0

4. PHASE 1 -- Development Configuration Engine

4.1 Goal

Move the output from "what can fit?" to "what are the reasonable ways to develop this?"

4.2 Additions

  · Developer Standards -- structured library per organization, hard/soft classification elicited at
     onboarding, reconciliation against rules

  · RFP / Brief -- structured targets, contradiction detection before computation
  · Parameterized tower typologies -- a small architect-authored library (4­6), each with a

     bounded parameter vector
  · Configuration enumeration -- a coarse deterministic grid over typology parameters, not a

     search algorithm
  · Objective functions -- explicit terms, explicit normalization, explicit weights
  · Configuration comparison -- aligned metrics, decomposable scoring
  · Developer-specific priorities -- organization objective policy with governance (§20.4)
  · Commercially preferred capacity -- the fourth capacity concept (§15)

4.3 Deliberately still absent

No NSGA-II. No CP-SAT. No Pareto front. Phase 1 enumerates a grid of perhaps 50­500
configurations, evaluates them all deterministically, and ranks them. This is not an optimizer; it is
exhaustive evaluation of a coarse space. It is enough to answer the customer question, and it defers
the entire performance problem (§8.4) until there is evidence the search space is genuinely too
large to enumerate.

If exhaustive enumeration turns out to be sufficient at production granularity, Phase 5 may be
substantially reduced or skipped. This is a real possible outcome and would be good news.

4.4 Phase 1 success criteria

#    Criterion                                                                Threshold
                                                                              3­6, distinct in design space
P1-  Distinct configurations produced per project                             (§18.3)
                                                                              100%
S1
                                                                              100% of arithmetic contradictions
P1-  Every configuration passes invariants and validation
                                                                              100%
S2
                                                                              < 60 s
P1-  Brief contradictions detected before computation
                                                                              3
S3
                                                                               40% (baseline measurement)
P1-  Ranking is fully decomposable to term contributions

S4

P1-  Enumeration completes

S5

P1-  Paying customers

S6

P1-  Recommended configuration carried into design without material capacity

S7   revision

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                        12
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                           v2.0

5. PHASE 2 -- Precedent Intelligence

5.1 Goal

Introduce approved-project data as evidence, and only then introduce the historically-observed
capacity concept.

5.2 Two acquisition paths, planned in parallel

Neither is assumed to succeed. The phase is scoped so that either one alone is sufficient to
deliver reduced value, and failure of both degrades the product gracefully rather than blocking it.

Path A -- Public / municipal data
  · Published municipal open-data channels (building permits, building summary information, floor-
     level information, building usages, project records) under a commercial licence permitting
     derivative analytical use
  · Strength: volume, breadth, low relationship cost
  · Weakness: almost certainly lacks NSA, unit mix, and permitted FAR -- which are precisely the
     fields the calibration needs. Path A alone supports density, floor-count, and parking-ratio
     benchmarking, not efficiency or achieved-vs-permitted FAR.

Path B -- Developer-partner portfolio
  · 10­40 completed projects per partner, contributed under contract, with full internal records
  · Strength: contains NSA, mix, permitted FAR, efficiency -- the fields that matter
  · Weakness: small n, selection bias toward one developer's practice, contractual complexity

The honest consequence
The metrics that make a "historically observed capacity" credible require Path B. Path A cannot
produce them. This is stated here rather than discovered in month nine. Phase 2 planning assumes
Path B is the primary source and Path A is breadth support.

5.3 Deliverables

  · Historical project schema with data tiering and licence tagging (§17.1)
  · Similarity engine -- faceted, regime-gated, per-domain transferability (§17.4)
  · Precedent retrieval and pattern extraction with minimum-n enforcement
  · Benchmarking: where does this configuration sit against comparable approvals
  · Precedent-based calibration  the historically-observed capacity concept

5.4 The realistic capacity band -- entry condition

The band that V1 shipped in MVP is removed from Phase 0 and Phase 1 entirely. It may be
introduced only when all of the following hold:

Condition                                            Threshold
Observations in the conditioning cell                n8
Fields required present                              plot area, permitted FAR, achieved GFA, NSA, unit count

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                     13
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                 v2.0

Condition                                            Threshold
Regulatory regime match                              Same regime, or divergence explicitly flagged
Backtest coverage on held-out projects                80% within P10­P90
Backtest sharpness                                   median (P90-P10)/P50  20%

Coverage without sharpness is meaningless -- a band of "3,000 to 30,000 m²" achieves 100%
coverage and zero value. Both are required.

Below n = 8, the system returns INSUFFICIENT_PRECEDENT and the user keeps their USER_SET realism
discount from Phase 0.

5.5 Phase 2 success criteria

#      Criterion                                                             Threshold
P2-S1  Precedent records at Tier B completeness                               120 (Path B  40)
P2-S2  Top-5 retrieved precedents judged relevant by an architect             70%
P2-S3  Backtest coverage and sharpness both met                              Per §5.4
P2-S4  Zero precedent values in any constraint derivation path               100%, CI-asserted
P2-S5  Every precedent record carries source, licence, redistributable flag  100%

Confidential -- internal working document                                                           14
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                               v2.0

6. PHASE 3 -- AI Document Understanding

6.1 Goal

Reduce the cost of getting data into the system, without letting a model become an authority.

6.2 Scope

AI extraction for: regulation documents, developer standards, RFPs. Plus requirement classification,
assumption identification, conflict identification, and the human review workflow that governs all of
it.

6.3 The mandatory pipeline -- no exceptions

    Source document
         LLM extraction to a strict candidate schema
         DETERMINISTIC NORMALIZATION
                 unit conversion · parameter-vocabulary binding · type coercion
                 · arithmetic cross-checks · duplicate detection
         CANDIDATE RULE (status = DRAFT, never evaluable)
         Human review by a qualified reviewer
         Approval (second reviewer for life-safety and planning parameters)
         Versioned rule with validity window
         Production

An LLM output can never reach production as an authoritative rule. Enforced at the schema
level: rule.approved_by is NOT NULL and the rule evaluator refuses to load records with status !=
APPROVED . There is no configuration flag that bypasses this.

6.4 Deterministic-first extraction

Developer standards documents are 60­80% tables. The pipeline routes structured content to a
deterministic table parser and sends only prose to the LLM. Unit normalization, area cross-
validation, and parameter binding are separate deterministic passes over model output -- never
instructions given to the model.

6.5 Extraction confidence -- the labelling rule

Self-consistency across samples measures sampling variance, not correctness. Therefore:

Label  Condition                                                              Permitted use
                                                                              May gate the review queue
CALIBRATED_CONFIDENCE Validated against the gold set, reliability curve
                                             published, Brier score reported  Display only, always labelled, may
                                                                              not gate anything
HEURISTIC_CONFIDENCE Anything else

A field is never presented with a bare number. It is CALIBRATED_CONFIDENCE 0.94 or
HEURISTIC_CONFIDENCE 0.94 (uncalibrated) .

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                         15
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                           v2.0

6.6 Phase 3 success criteria                                       Threshold
                                                                    95%
#      Criterion                                                   0
P3-S1  Critical-field extraction accuracy on gold set              0
P3-S2  Rules reaching production without human approval            100%
P3-S3  Statements silently dropped (neither extracted nor queued)   50%
P3-S4  Confidence labelled calibrated or heuristic
P3-S5  Onboarding time reduction vs. manual

Confidential -- internal working document                          16
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                     v2.0

7. PHASE 4 -- AI Generation

7.1 Goal

Generate massing, core, floorplate, units, and typical floors -- within constraints, never outside
them.

7.2 Scope

Tower massing generation · core configuration · floorplate generation · unit planning · typical floor
generation · multiple design alternatives.

7.3 The generation contract

The LLM does not invent geometry. Geometry is produced by deterministic parametric instantiation
and solver-based packing. If any generative model is used for layout proposal in future, its output is
a proposal that must pass constraint enforcement, invariant checks, and independent validation
before it can be emitted -- the same gate any other candidate passes.

7.4 Fidelity ceiling

Generated: core component footprints, corridor centreline and width, unit zone polygons with type,
area, frontage, depth, orientation, adjacency.

Not generated: internal partitions, rooms, wall thickness, doors, windows, structural grid, balcony
geometry beyond area allowance.

Stated in the drawing, not just the report.

7.5 Geometry restriction lift

Phase 0 restricts to rectilinear and simple convex plots. Phase 4 is where non-convex and irregular
footprints are addressed, because unit packing on arbitrary polygons is the genuinely hard case
(§14.5) and should be attempted only with the rest of the stack proven.

7.6 Phase 4 gate -- pre-authorized deferral

#      Criterion                                                                    Threshold
P4-S1  Generated floors geometrically valid                                         100%
P4-S2  Invariant layer pass                                                         100%
P4-S3  Blind architect panel: "reasonable starting point a designer could develop"   70%
P4-S4  Inter-rater reliability on the panel                                         Krippendorff   0.6

If P4-S3 lands below 60%, Phase 4 does not ship. Phases 0­3 continue as the product and
Phase 4 returns to development. This deferral is authorized here, in advance, so it is not a schedule
argument later.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                               17
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                         v2.0

8. PHASE 5 -- Full Optimization

8.1 Entry condition

Phase 5 begins only when Phase 4's generator is reliable -- meaning P4-S1 through S4 are met and
stable across two consecutive evaluation rounds. Optimizing an untrustworthy generator produces
confidently wrong answers faster.

8.2 Scope

Multi-objective optimization · Pareto frontier · weight sensitivity · advanced search · CP-SAT where
justified · surrogate models · caching · performance engineering.

8.3 "Where justified"

CP-SAT and NSGA-II are introduced only if Phase 1's exhaustive enumeration has been
demonstrated insufficient at production granularity. The evidence required is a measured
configuration space that cannot be enumerated within the runtime budget at the granularity
customers need. Absent that evidence, enumeration stays.

8.4 The performance problem, costed honestly

If a nested architecture is adopted (evolutionary outer loop over a solver-based inner loop), the
arithmetic must be done before the design is chosen:

    Population 100 × 50 generations = 5,000 evaluations. At 2 s per inner packing solve, that is
    ~2.8 CPU-hours; on 32 cores, ~5 minutes wall clock -- but only if packing is genuinely 2 s and
    only if the outer loop parallelizes cleanly against a solver with its own threading. A realistic
    first implementation lands at 30­90 minutes.

Mitigations that must be designed in, not discovered: surrogate models for the inner loop, caching
keyed on floorplate-geometry hash, and pre-solving packing as a lookup over (footprint × core
position) so the inner solve leaves the hot path entirely. This is real design work and it is scoped into
Phase 5, not assumed away.

8.5 Phase 5 success criteria

#      Criterion                                     Threshold
P5-S1  Hard-constraint violations in returned set    0
P5-S2  Returned options distinct in design space     Per §18.3 metric
P5-S3  Full run wall clock                            10 min p95
P5-S4  Re-rank on weight change without re-search    2s
P5-S5  Immutable-run reproducibility (§13.4)         100%

Confidential -- internal working document                                                             18
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

9. Functional Requirements

Format: ID · Requirement · Rationale · Input · Processing · Output · Priority · Acceptance
Criteria · Dependencies.

Prefixes: DEF definitions · PLT plot & geometry · RUL rule model · CAP capacity · PRK parking · INV
invariants · VAL validation · PRV provenance · ASM assumptions · OUT output · STD standards · RFP
brief · CFG configuration · OBJ objectives · PRE precedent · SIM similarity · EXT extraction · GEN
generation · OPT optimization · GOV governance.

9.1 Phase 0 -- Foundations

FR-DEF-001 -- Area & Metric Definitions Annex

  · Requirement: A single versioned, human-approved document defining every area and ratio
     term the system uses, cited by every report.

  · Rationale: GFA, BUA, NSA, sellable area, efficiency and FAR are used inconsistently across the
     industry. Without a signed definition, every customer dispute becomes unresolvable and every
     metric is untestable. This is the root dependency of the entire capacity model.

  · Input: Regulatory definitions where they exist; practitioner convention; architect and customer
     review.

  · Processing: Draft  architect review  design-partner review  sign-off  version.
  · Output: MetricDefinition records (§10.2); a one-page annex referenced by ID in every report.
  · Priority: P0 -- week 1, before any code
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: Defines at minimum: GFA, BUA, NSA, Sellable Area, Gross Efficiency, Tower Efficiency,

     Parking Area, Bay Area Factor, FAR, Plot Coverage.
  · AC2: Each definition states explicit inclusions and exclusions (balconies, terraces, plant, cores,

     circulation, parking, basements).
  · AC3: Records whether parking counts toward FAR, or marks it OPEN REGULATORY QUESTION (see

     FR-DEF-002).
  · AC4: Versioned; every report cites the version used.
  · AC5: No code merges that computes an area term absent from the annex.
  · Dependencies: None. Everything else depends on it.

FR-DEF-002 -- Parking-in-FAR Determination

  · Requirement: The system must explicitly represent whether parking area counts toward FAR/
     GFA, and must not assume an answer.

  · Rationale: This single question changes capacity by 15­35% on a podium-parking tower.
     Guessing it silently is the highest-magnitude quiet error the system can make.

  · Input: Regulatory research; authority confirmation; user declaration.
  · Processing: If an authoritative answer is confirmed and citable  a Rule , class DERIVED . If not

      status OPEN_REGULATORY_QUESTION , and the user is required to declare a treatment at project
     setup, recorded as USER_SET .
  · Output: parking_counts_toward_far with a provenance class; both scenarios computable on
     demand.
  · Priority: P0
  · Acceptance Criteria:

Confidential -- internal working document                                                               19
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

  · AC1: The value is never ASSUMED . It is DERIVED (cited) or USER_SET (declared). There is no
     default.

  · AC2: While OPEN_REGULATORY_QUESTION , the project cannot compute capacity until the user
     declares a treatment.

  · AC3: The report states the treatment applied, on the face page, with its provenance class.
  · AC4: A one-click comparison shows capacity under both treatments.
  · Dependencies: FR-DEF-001.

FR-PLT-001 -- Plot Input & Boundary

  · Requirement: Capture plot identity, planning parameters and boundary geometry via form
     entry and manual polygon drawing.

  · Rationale: Phase 0 isolates the engine. A form removes extraction as a variable and costs the
     user ~90 seconds.

  · Input: User form; basemap; optional coordinate list.
  · Processing: Validate polygon simplicity, closure, non-self-intersection; compute area, principal

     axes, minimum bounding rectangle, convexity ratio, per-edge length and bearing; user classifies
     each edge ( ROAD with hierarchy / ADJACENT_PLOT / OPEN_SPACE / OTHER ); cross-check computed
     area against stated area.
  · Output: Plot + PlotEdge[] with geometry provenance USER_SET .
  · Priority: P0
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: Only rectilinear and simple convex polygons accepted in Phase 0; others rejected with a
     clear message naming the restriction.
  · AC2: Computed vs. stated area deviation > 2% blocks until resolved.
  · AC3: Edge classification is mandatory for every edge; no default.
  · AC4: A trained user completes plot entry in  3 minutes, measured.
  · Dependencies: FR-DEF-001.

    Design note. Edge classification is deliberately not automated in Phase 0. Reliable automatic
    road-edge detection needs a road-hierarchy GIS layer joined to cadastral edges, whose
    availability and join quality are unverified (§30). Making the user classify four edges is a 20-
    second cost that removes an unproven dependency from the critical path.

FR-RUL-001 -- Typed Rule Records & Evaluator Registry

  · Requirement: Rules are stored as typed data records evaluated by a small registry of named
     evaluator functions. No DSL, no compiler in Phase 0.

  · Rationale: A DSL designed before ~100 rules have been authored will encode the wrong
     abstractions and will be rewritten. Typed records deliver bitemporality, provenance, testability
     and versioning immediately, while leaving awkward rules expressible as registered Python
     evaluators. Extract a DSL later, when the shape is known -- it will be a better DSL.

  · Input: Source instrument; architect authoring.
  · Processing: Author record  bind to parameter vocabulary  attach citation  author 3 tests

      review  approve  publish with validity window.
  · Output: Rule records (§11.2).
  · Priority: P0
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: Every rule carries source, citation, effective date, jurisdiction, applicability, version,

     approval status, provenance -- all non-null (Principle 9).

Confidential -- internal working document                                                              20
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

  · AC2: approved_by is non-null and is a qualified human. The evaluator refuses to load unapproved
     records. No bypass flag exists.

  · AC3: Every rule has 3 passing tests including one boundary and one negative case.
  · AC4: Every rule declares its class: GENERATIVE , FILTERING , or EVALUATIVE_ONLY (§11.3).
  · AC5: Bitemporal -- the rule set as of any past date is reconstructible.
  · AC6: Evaluator registry has  12 functions at Phase 0. Exceeding this is a signal the abstraction

     is wrong; review before adding.
  · Dependencies: FR-DEF-001.

FR-RUL-002 -- Applicability & Rule Set Materialization

  · Requirement: Select applicable rules for a project and freeze them as an immutable set bound
     to the run.

  · Rationale: Reproducibility and defensibility both require knowing exactly which rules were
     applied.

  · Input: Project context (land use, height band, plot attributes, occupancy); rule base at a version.
  · Processing: Evaluate applicability predicates; resolve overlaps by the resolution model (§11.5);

     materialize snapshot.
  · Output: ApplicableRuleSet with per-rule inclusion reason and near-miss exclusion reasons.
  · Priority: P0
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: Immutable once bound. Re-running after a rule-base change creates a new run.
  · AC2: User can see why each rule was included and why notable rules were excluded.
  · AC3: Non-scalar conflicts are handled per §11.6 and never silently resolved.
  · Dependencies: FR-RUL-001.

FR-RUL-003 -- Rule Class Compilation

  · Requirement: Compile applicable rules into three distinct operational forms.
  · Rationale: V1 required every rule to be "constructive." That is impossible for topological rules

     -- there is no constructive inverse of a travel-distance limit. Forcing one abstraction produced a
     spec that could not be implemented.
  · Input: ApplicableRuleSet .
  · Processing: Partition into GENERATIVE (construct geometry or bounds directly), FILTERING
     (prune candidates during construction), EVALUATIVE_ONLY (assess after construction; may only
     reject), and DEFERRED (applicable, not mechanizable at this fidelity).
  · Output: GenerativeSet , FilterSet , EvaluativeSet , DeferredCheckList .
  · Priority: P0
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: Every applicable rule lands in exactly one partition. Unassigned rules fail the build.
  · AC2: DeferredCheckList appears in every output, in the body.
  · AC3: EVALUATIVE_ONLY rules can only reject a candidate, never modify one.
  · Dependencies: FR-RUL-002.

FR-PLT-002 -- Buildable Envelope Solver

  · Requirement: Compute the buildable envelope from plot geometry and generative rules,
     naming the binding constraint for each dimension.

  · Rationale: The atomic unit of value. Everything above it is built on this being exactly right.
  · Input: Plot , PlotEdge[] , GenerativeSet .
  · Processing: Apply per-edge setback offsets  intersect  setback-permitted footprint. Apply

     coverage cap. Podium footprint = min(setback-permitted, coverage cap). Apply tower plate cap.

Confidential -- internal working document            21
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

     Apply height ceiling and floor-to-floor to derive maximum level counts. Recompute every area by
     an independent method and compare.
  · Output: BuildableEnvelope : setback-permitted footprint, coverage cap area, podium footprint,
     tower plate cap, height ceiling, max level counts -- each with its binding constraint and rule
     citation.
  · Priority: P0
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: Geometry valid, simple, closed; independent area recomputation agrees to  0.1%.
  · AC2: Every dimension names its binding constraint and cites its rule.
  · AC3: Where two constraints bind within 1%, both are reported.
  · AC4: Runs in < 2 s for  12 edges.
  · AC5: Golden set (§23): engine result within the two-architect band on  8 of 10 plots.
  · Dependencies: FR-PLT-001, FR-RUL-003.

FR-PRK-001 -- Parking Demand, Area and Level Implication

  · Requirement: Compute parking demand, required area, achievable level count, and the
     resulting capacity implication.

  · Rationale: Parking frequently determines podium size, which determines the ground plane and
     tower footprint. Computing GFA first and parking second produces schemes that collapse on
     contact with reality.

  · Input: Unit schedule (or candidate unit count and mix), parking rules, bay area factor, available
     basement and podium levels.

  · Processing: Apply per-type ratios  resident bays; apply visitor and accessible provisions; total
     bays. Bays × bay-area-factor  required area. Available area = (level footprint × usable
     fraction). Derive supply in bays, headroom, and the maximum unit count supportable.

  · Output: ParkingResult : bays by category with citations, required area, supply, headroom,
     supportable unit ceiling.

  · Priority: P0
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: Bay counts derive from cited rules, per category.
  · AC2: Bay area factor is explicit, editable, and stated in the report -- it is a top-three sensitivity

     driver and must never be hidden.
  · AC3: Feeds capacity band C before any ranking or recommendation.
  · AC4: No bay-level layout is produced. Output is a quantum, an area, and a level count.
  · AC5: Headroom reported in bays and percent.
  · Dependencies: FR-PLT-002, FR-RUL-003.

FR-CAP-001 -- Capacity Bands A / B / C

  · Requirement: Produce three separately-derived capacity figures.
  · Rationale: A single capacity number conceals which constraint is actually binding, which is the

     most decision-relevant fact on the page.
  · Input: BuildableEnvelope , ParkingResult , applicable rules, area definitions.
  · Processing: A -- Regulation-limited: FAR ceiling and any explicit area caps. B -- Geometry-

     limited: what the envelope physically holds under height and footprint limits, ignoring FAR. C --
     Parking-limited: the largest scheme the achievable parking supply supports. Report the
     minimum as governing, and name it.
  · Output: CapacityBands with per-band derivation, binding constraint, and headroom to the next-
     binding constraint.
  · Priority: P0

Confidential -- internal working document            22
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: All three bands always shown. Showing only one is a P0 defect.
  · AC2: The governing band is named explicitly.
  · AC3: Integer-granularity losses (e.g. unused FAR because another floor does not fit) are

     reported, not absorbed.
  · AC4: No "realistic" or "expected" band exists in Phase 0. Absence is enforced by schema.
  · Dependencies: FR-PLT-002, FR-PRK-001, FR-DEF-001.

FR-CAP-002 -- User-Entered Realism Discount

  · Requirement: Allow the user to apply a discount factor to the governing band, recorded as
     USER_SET .

  · Rationale: Practitioners know their own realization gap. The system does not, until Phase 2.
     Letting the user supply it is honest; inventing it is not.

  · Input: User-entered factor, default 1.00.
  · Processing: Apply to governing band; propagate to dependent metrics; record in the

     assumption register.
  · Output: Discounted capacity, class USER_SET , with the user's identity attached.
  · Priority: P1
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: Default is 1.00 (no discount). The system never pre-fills a discount.
  · AC2: Labelled USER_SET with the user's name wherever displayed.
  · AC3: Report states plainly that this is a user judgement, not a system estimate.
  · Dependencies: FR-CAP-001.

FR-INV-001 -- Invariant / Conservation Layer

  · Requirement: An independent layer asserting algebraic identities on every emitted
     configuration, before emission.

  · Rationale: V1's own worked example failed by factors of ~3 because nothing checked that
     areas summed. Constraints check permissibility; invariants check arithmetic coherence. They
     are different, and only the second would have caught it.

  · Input: Any Configuration or CapacityResult .
  · Processing: Evaluate the invariant catalogue (§12.2). Any failure blocks emission and raises an

     internal defect.
  · Output: InvariantReport : per-check pass/fail with computed vs. expected and residual.
  · Priority: P0
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: Runs on every emitted artifact including test fixtures, worked examples, and

     documentation samples.
  · AC2: A failure blocks emission. It is never a warning.
  · AC3: Implemented in a module with no imports from the generator or capacity engine (Principle

     4), enforced by an import linter in CI.
  · AC4: Owned by an engineer who does not own the capacity engine.
  · AC5: Every example in every product document passes it, verified in CI.
  · Dependencies: FR-DEF-001.

FR-VAL-001 -- Independent Validation

  · Requirement: Validate configurations against hard constraints, soft preferences and evaluative-
     only rules, in a module independent of generation.

Confidential -- internal working document            23
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

  · Rationale: Shared code between generator and validator makes the validator confirm the
     generator's own bugs.

  · Input: Configuration, FilterSet , EvaluativeSet , PreferenceSet .
  · Processing: Evaluate each; record per-check result with citation.
  · Output: ValidationReport .
  · Priority: P0
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: No shared evaluation code with the generator; separate module, separate owner.
  · AC2: Every result cites its rule.
  · AC3: The report states explicitly that agreement between validator and generator is

     self-consistency, not compliance (Principle 7).
  · AC4: The five-way claim distinction (§16.5) appears verbatim.
  · Dependencies: FR-RUL-003, FR-INV-001.

FR-PRV-001 -- Provenance Graph

  · Requirement: Every emitted value carries a provenance class and a complete derivation path.
  · Rationale: Traceability is the product. It is also unretrofittable -- provenance must be emitted

     at every layer boundary, so adding it later means rewriting every layer.
  · Input: All engine steps.
  · Processing: Emit nodes and edges at each derivation; assign classes; link to rule citations,

     assumptions, user inputs.
  · Output: Provenance DAG per run.
  · Priority: P0
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: 100% of emitted values have a non-null provenance class. CI-asserted; a null class fails the

     build.
  · AC2: Every DERIVED value's path terminates in a cited rule.
  · AC3: Derivation tree renders in  300 ms.
  · AC4: No PrecedentObservation appears in any constraint's derivation path (Principle 1). CI-

     asserted from Phase 2.
  · Dependencies: All Phase 0 engines.

FR-ASM-001 -- Assumption Register with Sensitivity

  · Requirement: Surface every ASSUMED value, ranked by measured impact, editable inline,
     acknowledged before export.

  · Rationale: The core failure mode is a user mistaking an assumption for a fact. This screen is the
     mitigation and the trust-establishing moment.

  · Input: Provenance graph.
  · Processing: Collect ASSUMED values; perturb each by ±10% (or ±1 unit for integers);

     recompute; rank by effect on governing capacity.
  · Output: Ranked register with value, basis, and quantified impact.
  · Priority: P0
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: Non-skippable before first export.
  · AC2: Impact quantified, e.g. "+3 m²/bay removes 1 floor: -1,060 m² GFA, -8 units."
  · AC3: Every entry editable inline with immediate recompute.
  · AC4: Rendered in a visually distinct state (amber) everywhere the value appears, not only in the

     register.
  · Dependencies: FR-PRV-001.

Confidential -- internal working document            24
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

FR-OUT-001 -- Report and JSON Export

  · Requirement: PDF report and complete JSON export.
  · Rationale: The report is the artifact that goes to the investment committee; the JSON is what

     makes the product composable.
  · Input: Run outputs.
  · Processing: Template composition; JSON serialization of the full model including provenance.
  · Output: PDF + JSON.
  · Priority: P0
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: Face page carries: metric-definitions version, rule-set version, parking-in-FAR treatment

     and its provenance, engine version, reviewer, professional-use disclaimer.
  · AC2: Every number footnoted to its provenance.
  · AC3: Body contains the assumption register, the deferred-check list, the invariant report and the

     five-way claim statement.
  · AC4: JSON round-trips: re-importing reproduces the identical report.
  · Dependencies: All Phase 0.

9.2 Phase 1 -- Configurations

FR-STD-001 -- Developer Standards Library

  · Requirement: Per-organization standards library with hard/soft classification and reconciliation
     against rules.

  · Rationale: Whether a standard is contractually mandatory or merely preferred is the largest
     source of downstream error, and standards documents almost never say. Inferring it will be
     wrong roughly a third of the time, invisibly.

  · Input: Standards documents; a guided elicitation session at onboarding.
  · Processing: Structure into parameter-bound requirements; elicit hard/soft classification

     from the customer's design manager once per document; reconcile against the rule set
     into COMPATIBLE / MORE_RESTRICTIVE / LESS_RESTRICTIVE / ORTHOGONAL .
  · Output: ReconciledStandardSet with dispositions and effective values.
  · Priority: P0 (Phase 1)
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: Classification is elicited, never inferred, in Phase 1.
  · AC2: Every LESS_RESTRICTIVE standard produces a visible record: regulation governs, with
     quantified impact.
  · AC3: Library is versioned and reused across that organization's projects.
  · AC4: A standard cannot override a rule except through a documented variance (FR-GOV-003).
  · Dependencies: FR-RUL-002.

FR-RFP-001 -- Brief Structuring and Contradiction Detection

  · Requirement: Structure brief targets and detect internal and regulatory contradictions before
     computation.

  · Rationale: Catching "180 units needs 21,900 m² against a 16,000 m² ceiling" in 30 seconds
     prevents an error that today survives weeks into a project.

  · Input: Structured form (Phase 1) or document (Phase 3).
  · Processing: Type each target HARD_TARGET / SOFT_TARGET / ASPIRATION ; run the contradiction

     battery (§16.2); compare against band A.

Confidential -- internal working document            25
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

  · Output: ProjectBrief with typed targets, Contradictions , BriefGaps .
  · Priority: P0 (Phase 1)
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: All arithmetic contradictions detected before computation, naming the incompatible pair

     and quantifying the shortfall.
  · AC2: Targets exceeding band A are flagged with the governing rule cited.
  · AC3: Gaps become assumption-register entries; they are never silently defaulted.
  · Dependencies: FR-CAP-001.

FR-CFG-001 -- Typology Library and Configuration Enumeration

  · Requirement: Enumerate configurations across an architect-authored parametric typology
     library.

  · Rationale: Free-form generation produces novel, unbuildable, unexplainable geometry and
     destroys traceability. Curated typologies give most of the value with full explainability.

  · Input: BuildableEnvelope , typology library, standards, brief.
  · Processing: For each typology, enumerate a coarse grid over its bounded parameter vector;

     reject candidates failing filter rules at instantiation; evaluate the survivors exhaustively.
  · Output: Configuration[] with parameter vectors and metrics.
  · Priority: P0 (Phase 1)
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1:  4 typologies attempted where the envelope permits; infeasible typologies report why.
  · AC2: 100% of emitted configurations pass invariants and independent validation.
  · AC3: Typology library is data-driven; adding a typology requires no code deployment.
  · AC4: Enumeration completes in < 60 s.
  · AC5: No search algorithm. Exhaustive evaluation only.
  · Dependencies: FR-PLT-002, FR-INV-001, FR-VAL-001.

FR-OBJ-001 -- Objective Functions and Ranking

  · Requirement: Score and rank configurations under an explicit, versioned objective profile.
  · Rationale: Weights are an organizational value judgement. A ranking without a recorded profile

     is neither reproducible nor defensible.
  · Input: Configurations; ObjectiveProfile .
  · Processing: Normalize each term via a versioned, approval-controlled normalization

     function (§21); apply weights; produce decomposable scores; compute margin over runner-up;
     test robustness under weight perturbation.
  · Output: Ranked configurations, scorecards, recommendation, robustness statement.
  · Priority: P0 (Phase 1)
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: Score fully decomposable to term contributions.
  · AC2: If the top two are within 3%, the system states the recommendation is not robust and
     explains what distinguishes them.
  · AC3: Every report states the objective profile ID and version.
  · AC4: Re-ranking on weight change does not re-enumerate; completes in < 2 s.
  · AC5: No fictional objectives. Marketability and view quality are excluded until the underlying
     data exists.
  · Dependencies: FR-CFG-001, FR-GOV-002.

Confidential -- internal working document            26
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

FR-CAP-003 -- Commercially Preferred Capacity

  · Requirement: Report the capacity of the configuration the developer's own objectives select, as
     a distinct concept from the three regulatory/physical bands.

  · Rationale: Principle 6 requires five distinct capacity concepts. This is the fourth.
  · Input: Ranked configurations; objective profile.
  · Processing: Take the recommended configuration's capacity; express as a delta from the

     governing band.
  · Output: commercially_preferred_capacity with the profile version that produced it.
  · Priority: P1 (Phase 1)
  · Acceptance Criteria: AC1: Always accompanied by the governing band, never shown alone.

     AC2: Delta from the governing band explained by named objective terms.
  · Dependencies: FR-OBJ-001, FR-CAP-001.

9.3 Phase 2 -- Precedent

FR-PRE-001 -- Precedent Corpus with Tiering and Licensing

  · Requirement: Structured corpus of approved projects, tiered by completeness, licence-tagged
     per record.

  · Rationale: Copyright and licence exposure in a precedent corpus is a real diligence risk. Tiering
     is required because attribute data and geometry data have completely different availability.

  · Input: Path A public data; Path B partner portfolios.
  · Processing: Entity resolution to plot; normalization; derived metrics; tier assignment; licence

     tagging; regulatory-regime tagging.
  · Output: PrecedentProject[] .
  · Priority: P0 (Phase 2)
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: Every record carries source, licence, redistributable flag, acquisition date.
  · AC2: Licence review is a gate on ingestion, owned by a named person, not a cleanup task.
  · AC3: Records lacking a regulatory-regime tag cannot enter the similarity index.
  · AC4: Tier is explicit; Tier A (with geometry) is not required for the phase to succeed.
  · Dependencies: §30 data acquisition.

FR-PRE-002 -- Pattern Extraction with Minimum-n

  · Requirement: Derive conditional distributions, never single values.
  · Rationale: A precedent-derived point estimate is indistinguishable from a fact in the reader's

     mind. A distribution with n is not.
  · Input: Corpus; conditioning context.
  · Processing: Compute distributions with sample counts and intervals.
  · Output: PrecedentPattern with n, median, quartiles, deciles.
  · Priority: P0 (Phase 2)
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: No pattern emitted with n < 8; below that, return INSUFFICIENT_PRECEDENT .
  · AC2: Every displayed pattern shows n, median and interquartile range.
  · AC3: PrecedentPattern cannot be a constraint source -- type-level, CI-asserted (Principle 1).
  · Dependencies: FR-PRE-001.

Confidential -- internal working document            27
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                          v2.0

FR-SIM-001 -- Faceted Similarity with Regime Gate

  · Requirement: Retrieve relevant precedents with per-facet scores and per-domain
     transferability.

  · Rationale: A single "92% similar" figure is false precision that encourages copying the closest
     project -- the exact behaviour the product must prevent. Two plots can be near-identical
     dimensionally and non-transferable regulatorily.

  · Input: Subject plot, context, query domain.
  · Processing: Stage 1 hard regime gate -- exclude precedents under a materially different

     regulatory regime for the queried parameters, and report the exclusion count. Stage 2 faceted
     scoring across spatial , dimensional , regulatory , programmatic , contextual , with temporal as a
     modifier and facet weights configured per query domain.
  · Output: Ranked precedents with facet vector, per-domain transferability, and explicit
     divergences.
  · Priority: P0 (Phase 2)
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: No single composite percentage is ever displayed as the headline. Facet breakdown
     only.
  · AC2: Each precedent lists its top three divergences.
  · AC3: Regime-gate exclusions shown as a count so the user knows filtering occurred.
  · AC4: Architect evaluation:  70% of top-5 judged genuinely relevant across 30 subject plots.
  · Dependencies: FR-PRE-001.

FR-CAP-004 -- Historically Observed Capacity

  · Requirement: The fifth capacity concept -- what comparable plots actually achieved --
     introduced only under the entry conditions of §5.4.

  · Rationale: Regulation sets the ceiling; parking, structure, market and negotiation set the
     outcome. The gap is typically where the pro forma lives. But claiming to know it without data is
     worse than not claiming it.

  · Input: PrecedentPattern set; subject context.
  · Processing: Locate the conditioning cell; if n  8 and backtest thresholds met, emit a

     distribution; otherwise INSUFFICIENT_PRECEDENT .
  · Output: historically_observed_capacity as a distribution with n, class OBSERVED .
  · Priority: P0 (Phase 2)
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: Never emitted below n = 8.
  · AC2: Both backtest coverage (80%) and sharpness (median (P90-P10)/P50  20%) required

     before the feature is enabled for a jurisdiction.
  · AC3: Always displayed alongside bands A/B/C, never replacing them.
  · AC4: Configurations exceeding the 95th percentile of precedent are flagged

     OPTIMISTIC_VS_PRECEDENT -- advisory only, never removed from the result set, because a
     legitimately better design should be allowed to beat precedent.
  · Dependencies: FR-PRE-002, FR-SIM-001.

9.4 Phase 3 -- Extraction

FR-EXT-001 -- Document Extraction to Candidate Records
  · Requirement: LLM extraction producing candidates that are never directly authoritative.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                28
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

  · Rationale: Principle: an LLM may read, structure and narrate; it may never author a rule that
     reaches production.

  · Input: Regulation, standards, RFP documents.
  · Processing: Route structured content to a deterministic table parser; prose to the LLM under a

     strict schema; then deterministic normalization (units, parameter binding, type coercion,
     arithmetic cross-checks); emit status = DRAFT .
  · Output: Candidate records + an UnparsedStatements queue.
  · Priority: P0 (Phase 3)
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: Candidates are not evaluable. The evaluator refuses status != APPROVED .
  · AC2: 100% of statements are either extracted or queued. Silent drops are a P0 defect.
  · AC3: Every field carries page and bounding-box reference rendered as a source highlight.
  · AC4: Confidence labelled CALIBRATED_CONFIDENCE or HEURISTIC_CONFIDENCE (§6.5).
  · Dependencies: FR-RUL-001.

FR-EXT-002 -- Human Review and Approval Workflow

  · Requirement: Route every candidate through qualified human review before publication.
  · Rationale: Legal consequence requires human accountability with a name attached.
  · Input: Candidate records.
  · Processing: Review queue sorted by impact then confidence; side-by-side source; correction

     capture; approval; second-reviewer requirement for life-safety and planning parameters.
  · Output: Approved versioned rules; correction telemetry.
  · Priority: P0 (Phase 3)
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: Rules reaching production without a named approver: 0.
  · AC2: Every correction persisted with original value, corrected value, user, timestamp -- the

     primary extraction-quality signal.
  · AC3: Review throughput measured and reported; it is the real capacity limit on the knowledge

     base.
  · Dependencies: FR-EXT-001, FR-GOV-001.

9.5 Phases 4­5 -- Generation and Optimization

FR-GEN-001 -- Massing, Core and Floorplate Generation

  · Requirement: Generate massing, core configuration and floorplate within enforced constraints.
  · Rationale: This is the output customers imagine when they hear "AI"; it is also the least

     trustworthy layer and therefore the last built.
  · Input: BuildableEnvelope , typology library, core rules, occupant load.
  · Processing: Parametric instantiation; core component sizing from cited rules; corridor topology;

     travel distance and exit separation evaluated geometrically as EVALUATIVE_ONLY rejections.
  · Output: Massing , CoreConfiguration , Floorplate .
  · Priority: P0 (Phase 4)
  · Acceptance Criteria: AC1: Every core component dimension traces to a rule or a declared

     assumption. AC2: 100% pass invariants and independent validation. AC3: Occupant-load
     circularity resolved per §11.7 with a bounded fixpoint.
  · Dependencies: Phase 0­3 complete.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                           29
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

FR-GEN-002 -- Unit Planning and Typical Floor

  · Requirement: Pack unit zones to a target mix within dimensional constraints.
  · Rationale: The hardest component in the product and the one with no ground truth.
  · Input: Floorplate, core, unit library, mix targets, dimensional standards.
  · Processing: Constrained assignment over a discretized plate; geometry adjudicated by the

     deterministic kernel, never by the solver's own arithmetic.
  · Output: TypicalFloor with labelled zones and computed efficiency.
  · Priority: P0 (Phase 4)
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: 100% geometrically valid -- no overlaps, façade access where required, every zone adjoins

     the corridor.
  · AC2: Efficiency computed from actual geometry, never assumed.
  · AC3: Where the mix is unachievable, the achievable mix is returned with quantified deviation --

     never a silent substitution.
  · AC4: Architect panel  70% (§7.6). Below 60%, the phase does not ship.
  · Dependencies: FR-GEN-001.

FR-OPT-001 -- Multi-Objective Search

  · Requirement: Replace enumeration with search only where enumeration is demonstrated
     insufficient.

  · Rationale: Introducing NSGA-II and CP-SAT before enumeration has failed adds the largest
     performance and correctness risk in the system for no measured benefit.

  · Input: Evidence that the configuration space cannot be enumerated within budget at required
     granularity.

  · Processing: Evolutionary outer loop; solver inner loop; hard constraints as feasibility filters,
     never as penalty terms; surrogates and caching per §8.4.

  · Output: Pareto front; ranking decoupled from search.
  · Priority: P0 (Phase 5)
  · Acceptance Criteria: AC1: Zero hard-constraint violations, independently verified. AC2:

     Options distinct in design space (§18.3). AC3:  10 min p95. AC4: Immutable-run reproducibility
     maintained.
  · Dependencies: Phase 4 stable.

9.6 Governance (all phases)

FR-GOV-001 -- Shared Asset Versioning and Approval

  · Requirement: Every shared production asset is versioned, approval-controlled, changelogged,
     and triggers impacted-run notification.

  · Rationale: Changing a default bay-area factor from 32 to 30 silently changes every customer's
     capacity. That is a production change with commercial consequences and currently has no
     approval path.

  · Input: Proposed change to a shared asset.
  · Processing: Proposal  impact analysis (which runs, which customers, what magnitude) 

     approval by the asset owner  publication with a new version  notification.
  · Output: Versioned asset; changelog; impacted-run list.
  · Priority: P0
  · Acceptance Criteria:

Confidential -- internal working document                                                          30
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

  · AC1: Covers rules, default assumptions, area definitions, typologies, objective normalizations,
     and deferred/non-mechanizable classifications (Principle 10).

  · AC2: No shared asset changes without a named approver.
  · AC3: Impacted runs identified within 24 h and their owners notified.
  · AC4: Past runs are never mutated by an asset change.
  · Dependencies: §13.4.

FR-GOV-002 -- Objective Profile Governance

  · Requirement: Objective weights are an organizational governance artifact, not a per-user
     preference.

  · Rationale: If every user sets their own weights, two people in the same company produce
     contradictory recommendations for the same plot and the product's authority collapses at the
     investment committee.

  · Input: Organization policy; project profile; exploratory adjustments.
  · Processing: Three tiers -- org policy (set by the development director, versioned, audited),

     project profile (within org bounds, justification required outside them), exploratory
     (watermarked, non-exportable). Role affects presentation order only, never ranking.
  · Output: Versioned ObjectiveProfile .
  · Priority: P0 (Phase 1)
  · Acceptance Criteria: AC1: Every report states the profile ID and version. AC2: Divergent
     rankings by role are a defect, not a feature. AC3: Normalization functions are themselves
     versioned assets under FR-GOV-001.
  · Dependencies: FR-OBJ-001.

FR-GOV-003 -- Variance Handling

  · Requirement: A documented, evidenced, expiring override of a rule for a specific plot.
  · Rationale: Without an explicit variance mechanism, a user holding a legitimate approved

     exemption will edit the rule base to work around a correct refusal, silently corrupting a shared
     asset.
  · Input: User assertion plus an evidence document.
  · Processing: Create a Variance bound to rule + plot + evidence + asserter + expiry; second-
     user review where the tenant is multi-seat; apply to the constraint set with a prominent report
     annotation.
  · Output: Variance record; modified constraint set.
  · Priority: P1 (Phase 1)
  · Acceptance Criteria:
  · AC1: No variance without an uploaded evidence document. No "upload later."
  · AC2: Life-safety rules cannot be varied -- the pathway is disabled for that rule class.
  · AC3: Every report produced under a variance carries a face-page notice.
  · AC4: Variances expire and require re-confirmation.
  · AC5: Second-reviewer requirement is tenant-configurable and defaults on for multi-seat
     organizations -- single-seat users are not blocked.
  · Dependencies: FR-RUL-001.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                              31
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

10. Data Model

10.1 Design principles

Separate epistemic classes at the type level. Rule , Standard , Target , and PrecedentObservation
are distinct types with distinct capabilities. PrecedentObservation is structurally incapable of being a
Constraint source. Principle 1 is a property of the type system, not a policy someone can forget.

Everything authoritative is bitemporal. Validity time (when the rule was in force) and
transaction time (when we recorded it). Without both, you cannot reproduce a past run or answer
"was this correct at the time?"

Parameters are first-class. setback.front is an entity, not a string key. Rules, standards and
targets all bind to it. This is what makes cross-source conflict detection tractable rather than string-
matching.

Runs are immutable. Results are append-only. An asset change creates a new run; it never
mutates an old one.

Confidential -- internal working document            32
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                      v2.0

10.2 Core entities

METRIC_DEFINITION                          -- FR-DEF-001; root of everything
metric_id, name, formula_statement
inclusions[], exclusions[]
version, approved_by, approved_at

PARAMETER                                  -- the shared vocabulary
parameter_id                               -- 'setback.front', 'parking.ratio.2bed'
name, domain, unit_type, value_type
is_life_safety: bool
rule_class_default: GENERATIVE | FILTERING | EVALUATIVE_ONLY

PLOT
   plot_id, tenant_id
   plot_number, community, land_use
   stated_area, computed_area, area_mismatch_flag
   geometry: Polygon, geometry_source, geometry_class (USER_SET in Phase 0)
   shape_class: RECTILINEAR | SIMPLE_CONVEX | COMPLEX -- COMPLEX rejected in Phase 0
   derived: principal_axis, mbr, convexity_ratio, frontage_count

PLOT_EDGE
   edge_id, plot_id, seq, geometry: LineString
   classification: ROAD | ADJACENT_PLOT | OPEN_SPACE | OTHER
   road_hierarchy, length_m, bearing_deg
   applied_setback_value, applied_setback_rule_id

RULE                                       -- §11.2
DEVELOPER_STANDARD                         -- Phase 1
PROJECT_BRIEF                              -- Phase 1
OBJECTIVE_PROFILE                          -- Phase 1, versioned, governed

CONSTRAINT_SET                             -- materialized, immutable per run
generative[], filtering[], evaluative[], deferred[]
preferences[]
-- TYPE INVARIANT: no PrecedentObservation in any derivation path

BUILDABLE_ENVELOPE
   setback_permitted_footprint_m2, coverage_cap_m2, podium_footprint_m2
   tower_plate_cap_m2, height_ceiling_m
   max_levels_by_height, binding_constraint_per_dimension{}

CAPACITY_RESULT                            -- band A
regulation_limited_gfa
geometry_limited_gfa                       -- band B
parking_limited_gfa                        -- band C
governing_band, governing_constraint_rule_id
commercially_preferred_gfa                 -- Phase 1, nullable
historically_observed_gfa                  -- Phase 2, nullable, distribution
user_realism_discount                      -- USER_SET, default 1.00
integer_granularity_loss_m2

CONFIGURATION                              -- Phase 1+
config_id, run_id, typology_id, parameter_vector
massing{}, core{}, unit_schedule[], parking{}
metrics{}, scores{}
invariant_report_id, validation_report_id, provenance_root_id

PRECEDENT_PROJECT                          -- Phase 2; §17.1
PRECEDENT_OBSERVATION                      -- NEVER a constraint source
VARIANCE                                   -- evidence-bound, expiring, non-life-safety
RUN                                        -- immutable; §13.4
PROVENANCE_NODE / EDGE                     -- §13.2
INVARIANT_REPORT                           -- §12

10.3 What changed from V1                                        Reason
                                                                 V1 used GFA/BUA/NSA/efficiency without definitions; the
  Change                                                         root cause of its broken example
  METRIC_DEFINITION added as a first-class entity                Enforces the Phase 0 geometry restriction at the data
                                                                 layer, not in a comment
  shape_class on plot                                            Cannot be computed without data that does not yet exist

  realistic_capacity field removed;                              Honest substitute during Phases 0­1
  historically_observed nullable
  user_realism_discount added, USER_SET

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                                 33
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                                                                  v2.0

    Change                                              Reason
     binding_constraint_per_dimension promoted to a     It is the most decision-relevant output and was buried in
    structured field                                    prose
     integer_granularity_loss added                     The floor that does not fit is real capacity loss and was
                                                        previously absorbed silently
    Rule class (generative/filtering/evaluative) added  V1 required all rules to be constructive, which is
                                                        impossible
     INVARIANT_REPORT added                             New layer

Confidential -- internal working document               34
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                   v2.0

11. Rule Model

11.1 Typed records, not a DSL

Decision: Phase 0 stores rules as typed data records evaluated by a registry of named functions.
No DSL, no compiler.

Why this reverses V1. A DSL designed before ~100 rules exist encodes the wrong abstractions.
Typed records deliver bitemporality, provenance, versioning and testability immediately, and leave
genuinely awkward rules expressible as a registered Python evaluator rather than as a fight with a
grammar. Extract a DSL around rule 100, when the shape is known. The DSL will be better and the
migration is mechanical because the records are already typed.

Guard: the evaluator registry is capped at 12 functions in Phase 0. Exceeding it signals the
abstraction is wrong and triggers a design review rather than a thirteenth function.

11.2 Rule record

    {
        "rule_id": "R-SETBACK-ROAD-RES",
        "parameter_id": "setback.road",
        "rule_class": "GENERATIVE",
        "evaluator": "table_lookup_min",
        "evaluator_args": {"key": ["road_hierarchy"], "table": "T-SETBACK-01"},
        "unit": "m",
        "applicability": {
           "all": [
               {"land_use": {"in": ["RESIDENTIAL_MULTI"]}},
               {"edge.classification": {"eq": "ROAD"}}
           ]
        },
        "citation": {
           "instrument_id": "...", "instrument_version": "...",
           "clause_reference": "...", "document_uri": "...",
           "source_page": 0, "source_bbox": [0,0,0,0],
           "source_text_verbatim": "..."
        },
        "jurisdiction": "DM_MAINLAND",
        "is_life_safety": false,
        "mechanization": "MECHANIZED",
        "valid_from": "YYYY-MM-DD", "valid_to": null,
        "recorded_at": "...", "version": 3, "supersedes": "...",
        "status": "APPROVED",
        "authored_by": "...", "approved_by": "...", "approved_at": "...",
        "tests": [
           {"kind": "POSITIVE", "context": {...}, "expected": 6.0},
           {"kind": "BOUNDARY", "context": {...}, "expected": 4.5},
           {"kind": "NEGATIVE", "context": {"land_use": "INDUSTRIAL"}, "expected": "NOT_APPLICABLE"}
        ]

    }

All nine Principle-9 fields are non-null. status != APPROVED is not loadable by the evaluator.

11.3 The three rule classes

Class       Definition                               Operational role             Examples
GENERATIVE
            Can directly construct                   Builds the envelope; runs    Setbacks (polygon offset), height
FILTERING                                                                         ceiling, FAR ceiling, coverage cap,
            geometry or a numeric bound first                                     tower plate cap

            Prunes candidates during                 Applied at instantiation; a  Minimum unit area, minimum
            construction                             candidate violating it is    corridor width, minimum stair width,
                                                     never created                parking ratio

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                               35
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                                 v2.0

Class                  Definition                     Operational role            Examples

EVALUATIVE_ONLY        Assessable only after a        Applied post-construction;  Maximum travel distance, exit
                       candidate exists; has no       can only reject, never      separation, dead-end corridor
                       constructive inverse           modify                      length, aggregate occupant load

DEFERRED               Applicable but not             Declared in every output    Performance-based smoke control,
                       mechanizable at this fidelity                              façade fire performance,
                                                                                  discretionary judgement

Why this matters for the architecture: V1 required every rule to declare a "constructive form,"
which is impossible for topological rules -- there is no way to generate a floorplate from a travel-
distance limit. EVALUATIVE_ONLY rules prune only after the fact, which changes search efficiency
materially. Phase 5 must budget for rejection rates in the outer loop; that cost is now visible.

11.4 Evaluator registry (Phase 0, 12)

scalar_min · scalar_max · table_lookup_min · table_lookup_max · ratio_per_unit_type ·
percentage_of_base · polygon_offset_inward · count_minimum · range_bound · enum_permitted_set ·
conditional_scalar · custom_python (registered, tested, reviewed like any other rule).

11.5 Overlap resolution -- scalar parameters

For a parameter with multiple applicable rules:

 1. A plot-specific instrument specifying the parameter governs -- it is the instrument that applies
     the general framework to this plot. Exception: it cannot relax a life-safety parameter.

 2. Otherwise, across authorities, most restrictive governs. An overlay adds restriction; it does
     not relax a baseline.

 3. Every non-governing candidate is recorded as a supersededBy edge and is visible to the user.

"Most restrictive" is well-defined for scalars: for MIN operators the maximum value; for MAX
operators the minimum value.

11.6 Non-scalar conflict handling

"Most restrictive wins" is undefined for enumerated values, topological rules and incommensurable
units. V1 asserted the rule without defining the order. The resolution:

Parameter type         Partial order                  Resolution
Scalar with MIN/MAX    Total order                    Automatic
Bounded range          Intersection                   Automatic; empty intersection  IRRECONCILABLE
Count                  Total order (max)              Automatic
Enumerated set         Set intersection               Automatic if intersection non-empty; empty 
                                                      IRRECONCILABLE
Enumerated single      No order exists                REQUIRES_ADJUDICATION
value
Topological            No order exists                REQUIRES_ADJUDICATION
Cross-unit (ratio vs.
absolute)              Comparable only within a fixed Evaluate both in context; if still incomparable 

                       context                        REQUIRES_ADJUDICATION

REQUIRES_ADJUDICATION behaviour: the conflict is surfaced, computation for the affected parameter
halts, and a human-authored AdjudicationRecord is required. The record is a shared, versioned,

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                           36
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

approval-controlled asset under FR-GOV-001 -- authored once per conflicting rule pair, reused
across all projects, and cited in every report that relies on it.
IRRECONCILABLE behaviour: no configuration exists that satisfies both. The system reports
infeasibility naming both rules -- it does not pick one.
The system never silently resolves a conflict it has no defined order for. This was an unresolved gap
in V1 and would have produced arbitrary behaviour at runtime.

11.7 Circular dependencies -- the occupant-load fixpoint

The circularity is real: applicable rules depend on occupant load  occupant load depends on the
design  the design depends on the rules.
Resolution: a bounded, conservative, monotone fixpoint.

    1. SEED conservatively.
          Occupant load seeded at the maximum the buildable envelope could
          physically support under the least restrictive plausible density.
          Conservative = over-estimates load = selects the more restrictive
          rule set. Erring toward more restriction is the safe direction.

    2. ITERATE.
          Compute rule set from current load  compute configuration 
          recompute load from the configuration.

    3. CONVERGENCE TEST.
          Converged when the applicable rule set is identical across two
          consecutive iterations. Note: on the RULE SET, not on the load
          value -- rules switch at thresholds, so load can oscillate within
          a band while the rule set is stable.

    4. BOUND.
          Maximum 5 iterations.

    5. NON-CONVERGENCE.
          If the rule set has not stabilized in 5 iterations, the system
          does NOT pick one. It emits NON_CONVERGENT_APPLICABILITY, names
          the oscillating rules and the threshold they straddle, and
          requires the user to declare the occupancy basis (recorded
          USER_SET). Computation resumes from that declaration.

    6. RECORD.
          The iteration history is part of the provenance graph. The report
          states how many iterations were required.

Why the seed is conservative rather than optimistic: an optimistic seed can converge to a rule
set that is less restrictive than the true one -- a silent under-constraint. A conservative seed
converging downward is safe at every step. Where the two directions disagree, the system reports
the discrepancy rather than choosing.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                              37
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                 v2.0

12. Invariant Model

12.1 Why this layer exists

The V1 worked example claimed a 21-storey tower with a 792 m² plate and 6,700 m² GFA. 21 × 792
= 16,632. It claimed 172 units in 5,268 m² of NSA against minimum unit areas of 65­155 m² -- 30.6
m² per unit. Its own contradiction checker, two pages later, computed a maximum near 55­60 units
on the same plot.

Nothing caught any of it, because constraint checking asks "is this permitted?" and invariant
checking asks "does this arithmetic close?" They are different questions. Only the second catches a
configuration that is impossible rather than impermissible.

These are conservation laws, not constraints. They are cheap, they are absolute, and they run
on every artifact the system produces -- including documentation examples, test fixtures, and demo
data.

12.2 Invariant catalogue

ID      Invariant                                                        Tolerance
INV-01  (level GFA) = total GFA                                          0.1%
INV-02  (unit NSA) + core + circulation + services = level gross area    0.5%
INV-03  total GFA / plot area = reported FAR                             0.1%
INV-04  (unit counts by type) = reported unit count                      exact
INV-05  (mix shares) = 1.000                                             0.001
INV-06  Reported unit count × weighted mean unit NSA = total NSA         1%
INV-07  Reported efficiency = NSA / GFA, at the definition scope stated  0.1%
INV-08  Podium footprint  setback-permitted footprint                    exact
INV-09  Podium footprint  coverage cap                                   exact
INV-10  Tower plate  podium footprint AND  tower plate cap               exact
INV-11  (level heights) = reported total height  height ceiling          0.01 m
INV-12  Parking bays × bay area factor  available parking area           exact
INV-13  Parking bays  computed demand                                    exact
INV-14  Level count × level height budget is integer-consistent          exact
INV-15  Every area term used appears in the metric definitions annex     exact
INV-16  Governing capacity = min(A, B, C) and is labelled as such        exact
INV-17  Achieved FAR  permitted FAR                                      exact
INV-18  GFA composition matches the declared parking-in-FAR treatment    exact

12.3 Independence and enforcement

  · Separate module. No imports from the generator or capacity engine. Enforced by an import
     linter in CI (Principle 4).

  · Owned by an engineer who does not own the capacity engine.
  · Failure blocks emission. Never a warning, never a configurable severity.

Confidential -- internal working document                                           38
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                  v2.0

  · Runs against every worked example in every product document as a CI job. This document's
     Appendix example is verified by that job.

12.4 What invariants are not

They do not establish compliance, correctness of rules, or fitness for purpose. A configuration can
pass every invariant and be entirely non-compliant -- it is merely arithmetically coherent. This
distinction appears in the report (§16.5).

Confidential -- internal working document                                                            39
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                         v2.0

13. Provenance Model

13.1 Provenance classes

Class     Meaning                                                 Rendering
DERIVED   Computed from a cited rule                              Neutral, citation link
ASSUMED   System default filling a gap                            Amber, dotted underline, inline-editable
USER_SET  Supplied or overridden by a named user                  User badge
OBSERVED  From precedent distribution (Phase 2+)                  Distribution sparkline with n
TRADEOFF  Optimizer choice among feasible alternatives (Phase 5)  Trade-off link showing what was given up
VARIANCE  Governed by a documented exemption                      Red border, evidence link

The amber ASSUMED treatment is the most important UI decision in the product. The core
failure mode is a user mistaking an assumption for a fact. Making assumptions visually loud,
everywhere, permanently, is the mitigation. This must survive design review; softening it for
aesthetic reasons defeats the product.

13.2 Graph shape

Value derivedFrom Computation uses Rule citedIn SourceClause
                   uses Input enteredBy User
                   uses Assumption justifiedBy Basis
                   uses PrecedentPattern(n) [Phase 2]
boundedBy Constraint sourcedFrom Rule | Standard | Target | Variance
sensitiveTo Assumption (with value/assumption)

13.3 CI-asserted invariants on provenance

 emitted value     : provenance_class  null
 DERIVED value     :  cited rule in derivation path
 ASSUMED value     :  assumption register  sensitivity computed
 OBSERVED value    :  pattern in path  pattern.n  8
 constraint        :  PrecedentObservation in derivation path
 numeral in prose  :  values(provenance subgraph)    [Phase 3+]
 life-safety rule  :  variance

13.4 Immutable run reproducibility

V1 required "100% run reproducibility over 24 months." That is impossible -- the pipeline
includes LLM calls from Phase 3, models are deprecated, and even at temperature 0 batching and
hardware introduce non-determinism. The requirement conflated two different things.

Corrected definition:

Term               Definition                                                               Guarantee
Immutable run
reproducibility    A run's stored outputs, inputs, versions, and provenance graph are       100%, required
                   retrievable unchanged, and the deterministic portion of the pipeline
Pipeline re-       can be re-executed from persisted intermediate artifacts to produce
execution          byte-identical results

                   Re-running the full pipeline including extraction from source documents  Not guaranteed.
                                                                                            Produces a new run with
                                                                                            a new ID.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                            40
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

What is persisted to make this hold: post-extraction structured inputs, rule set version and content
hash, metric definitions version, all assumption values, all user inputs, engine version, RNG seed,
and the full provenance graph.

The practical consequence for a customer: "we can always show you exactly what produced this
number, and we can always recompute it identically from what we stored -- we cannot promise that
re-reading your PDF today gives the same extraction as it did last year." That is both honest and
sufficient for every audit purpose the product serves.

Confidential -- internal working document            41
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

14. Geometry Model

14.1 Phase 0 restriction

Rectilinear and simple convex polygons only. Enforced at the data layer via shape_class , not by
convention. Complex and non-convex plots are rejected with a message naming the restriction.
Lifted in Phase 4.
Why: partitioning a non-convex polygon into rectangles under simultaneous area, frontage, depth,
aspect-ratio, façade-access and corridor-adjacency constraints is a research area, not a
configuration option. It is tractable on rectilinear footprints via strip decomposition. Phase 0 does
not need it and should not carry its risk.

14.2 Operations required in Phase 0

Per-edge inward offset · polygon intersection · area (with independent recomputation by a second
method) · principal axis · minimum bounding rectangle · convexity ratio · point-in-polygon · polygon
validity.

14.3 Numerical policy

  · Exact predicates for orientation and intersection; never raw floating-point comparison
  · Every area computed twice by independent methods; disagreement > 0.1% is a P0 defect, not a

     rounding note
  · Snap tolerance declared explicitly, not implicit in the library
  · Degenerate results (slivers, near-tangent offsets, self-intersections) raise rather than return
This is the class of bug that produces a plausible answer wrong by 4%, silently, for six months. The
double-computation policy is the cheapest insurance available.

14.4 Coordinate handling

Local metric CRS (UTM 40N) for all computation. WGS84 stored for display only. No geometric
operation in a geographic CRS.

14.5 Deferred to Phase 4

Non-convex and irregular plots · unit packing on arbitrary polygons · 3D massing operations beyond
extrusion · façade surface analysis.

Confidential -- internal working document            42
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                                              v2.0

15. Capacity Model

15.1 Five distinct capacity concepts (Principle 6)

Never merged, never averaged, each with its own derivation and its own field.

# Concept                 Question                                      Available                             Provenance
                                                                        from                                  DERIVED
A Regulatory capacity                                                                                         DERIVED
B Geometric capacity      What does FAR and the area caps permit?       Phase 0
                                                                                                              DERIVED
C Parking capacity        What does the envelope physically hold under  Phase 0
                          height and footprint limits?                                                        DERIVED + profile
D Commercially preferred                                                                                      version
      capacity            What can the achievable parking supply        Phase 0                               OBSERVED , with n
                          support?
E Historically observed
      capacity            What does the developer's own objective       Phase 1
                          profile select?

                          What have comparable plots actually achieved? Phase 2,
                                                                                                       gated

15.2 Governing capacity

governing = min(A, B, C) , always named, always with its binding rule cited. Headroom to the next-
binding constraint is reported, because that is what tells a developer where to push.

15.3 What is deliberately absent

There is no "realistic," "expected," or "likely" band in Phase 0 or Phase 1. Absence is
enforced by schema -- the field does not exist. In its place, user_realism_discount , defaulting to
1.00, class USER_SET , attributed to the user who entered it.

Why: the metrics that make a realism estimate credible -- achieved-vs-permitted FAR, and
efficiency -- require permitted FAR per plot and NSA per building. Neither is available in public
municipal permit data. Manufacturing the band from an unvalidated heuristic and labelling it
"realistic" is the single most damaging thing this product could do, because it is the number
customers will act on and it is the one they cannot check.

15.4 Integer granularity

Capacity is quantized by floors. When permitted GFA exceeds what an integer number of floors
consumes, the remainder is reported as integer_granularity_loss , not absorbed. In the worked
example this is 300 m² (1.88% of permitted GFA) -- small, but the kind of number a developer wants
to see rather than have smoothed away.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                                        43
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                                    v2.0

16. Validation Model

16.1 Three constraint categories

Category    Definition                                     Behaviour
HARD        Must not be violated                           Feasibility filter; violating candidates are never emitted
SOFT        Preferred; deviation scored                    Optimized; deviation reported
DEFERRED    Applicable but not checkable at this fidelity  Declared explicitly in every output

16.2 Contradiction battery (Phase 1)

Run before any computation:

target_gfa         vs units × mix × min_unit_area / target_efficiency
target_unit_count  vs band_A_gfa / weighted_mean_unit_area
target_floors      vs height_ceiling / min_floor_to_floor
parking_implied_area vs available_levels × footprint × usable_fraction
target_sellable    vs target_gfa × max_plausible_efficiency
target_gfa         vs band_A_gfa

Each failure names the incompatible pair and quantifies the shortfall.

16.3 Independence

Validator shares no evaluation code with the generator; separate module, separate owner, import-
linted.

16.4 The honest limit of independence

Implementation independence is not semantic independence. The validator evaluates the same
encoded constraint set the generator consumed. It catches generator implementation bugs. It
does not catch a mis-encoded rule, a missing rule, or a rule whose applicability predicate is wrong.

V1 stated a "0% hard-constraint violation" metric as though it meant compliance. It means self-
consistency. This document says so wherever the metric appears.

16.5 The five-way claim statement

Every validation report contains these five statements, separately, verbatim (Principle 8):

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                              44
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                               v2.0

SELF-CONSISTENCY     The configuration satisfies every constraint we
                     encoded, and its arithmetic closes.
                     Status: PASS / FAIL

RULE COVERAGE        We encoded N of M requirements identified as
                     applicable. K are deferred and listed below.
                     Status: N/M, coverage X%

GEOMETRIC VALIDITY   Geometry is topologically valid; areas independently
                     recomputed and agree.
                     Status: PASS / FAIL

REGULATORY VALIDITY  NOT ASSESSED. This system does not and cannot
                     determine whether an authority would approve this
                     scheme.

PROFESSIONAL AGREEMENT Where measured against qualified architects on
                                         comparable plots, this engine fell within the
                                         inter-architect disagreement band in X of Y cases.
                                         Status: <measured value or NOT YET MEASURED>

The fourth line is permanent and never changes. The fifth is populated from the golden set (§23)
and is the honest answer to "is it accurate?"

Confidential -- internal working document                                                         45
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                                       v2.0

17. Historical Precedent Model

17.1 Precedent record and tiering

PRECEDENT_PROJECT
   precedent_id
   acquisition_path: PUBLIC | PARTNER
   data_tier: A | B | C
   source, licence, redistributable: bool, acquired_at
   plot_reference, community, approval_date, land_use
   plot_area, permitted_far, built_up_area, gfa
   floors_above, floors_below, unit_count, unit_mix, nsa
   parking_bays
   achieved_far (derived), efficiency (derived, requires nsa)
   regulatory_regime_id                    -- required for the similarity gate
   geometry                                -- Tier A only
   feature_vector

Tier Contents                                        Enables

A  Attributes + geometry + approval history Massing precedent, layout patterns

B  Full attributes incl. NSA, mix, permitted         Efficiency and achieved-vs-permitted calibration -- the fields that

   FAR                                               matter

C  Partial attributes (typical of public data) Density, floor count, parking ratio benchmarking only

The honest position: public municipal permit data yields Tier C, occasionally Tier B-minus. It does
not carry NSA, unit mix, or permitted FAR. Tier B comes overwhelmingly from partner portfolios.
§30 plans both paths accordingly.

17.2 Precedent is evidence, never authority

Enforcement is structural, at three levels:

 1. Type level -- PrecedentObservation cannot be a Constraint source. Not a runtime check; a type
     error.

 2. CI assertion -- no precedent node appears in any constraint's derivation path.
 3. Output linting -- report text framing precedent as permissive ("this is allowed because a

     previous project...") is rejected by a linter before render.

17.3 What precedent is for, in priority order

 1. Calibration -- converting regulatory ceilings into observed outcomes
 2. Plausibility bounding -- catching the system's own optimism, flagged advisory-only
 3. Benchmarking -- where does this configuration sit against comparable approvals
 4. Generator seeding (Phase 4) -- biasing typology selection toward what is actually built
 5. Explanation -- "34 comparable approvals, median efficiency 76%" is the sentence that

     persuades a committee

Not for: overriding regulation, geometric copying, or justifying a non-compliant scheme.

17.4 Similarity measurement -- the definition

Stage 1 -- Regime gate (binary, hard). Exclude precedents governed by a materially different
regulatory regime for the parameters being queried. A project approved under a superseded

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                                 46
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                v2.0

parking standard is not comparable for parking questions, however similar its plot. The exclusion
count is reported so the user knows filtering occurred.

Stage 2 -- Faceted scoring. A vector, never a scalar.

Facet         Components
spatial       distance, same community, same sub-community
dimensional   plot area ratio, aspect ratio, shape complexity, frontage count
regulatory    land use, permitted FAR, height band, coverage cap
programmatic  building type, unit mix, density
contextual    orientation, adjacency, road hierarchy
temporal      approval recency (decay modifier)

Facet weights are per query domain, not global. For a parking question, regulatory and
temporal dominate and contextual is nearly irrelevant. For a massing question, dimensional and
contextual dominate.

Stage 3 -- Transferability, which is not similarity. Similarity measures how alike two plots are.
Transferability measures how much a specific lesson survives the difference. A precedent 88%
similar overall but with two road frontages instead of one has high transferability for efficiency
ratios and low transferability for massing and access strategy. Reported per domain, with the
divergences that reduce it.

Presentation rule: never a headline percentage. Facet breakdown, top-three divergences, and a
plain-language transferability statement. A "92% similar" badge is false precision and encourages
exactly the copying behaviour Principle 1 forbids.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                           47
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                       v2.0

18. AI Architecture

18.1 The deterministic / AI boundary

Concern                                    Implementation                                                 Phase
Geometry, areas, envelopes                 Deterministic kernel                                           0
Rule applicability and evaluation          Deterministic                                                  0
Capacity computation                       Deterministic                                                  0
Parking demand                             Deterministic                                                  0
Invariants                                 Deterministic                                                  0
Validation                                 Deterministic, independent module                              0
Configuration enumeration and scoring      Deterministic                                                  1
Similarity scoring                         Deterministic faceted (learned facet weights only much later)  2
Document extraction                        LLM/VLM, schema-constrained, human-reviewed                    3
Table extraction                           Deterministic parser -- not the LLM                            3
Unit normalization, parameter binding      Deterministic pass over model output                           3
Requirement classification                 Deterministic mapping once the parameter is identified         3
Rule authoring                             Human-authored, LLM-drafted, never auto-published              3
Explanation prose                          LLM, graph-grounded, numerically post-verified                 3
Unit packing                               Constraint solver                                              4
Massing search                             Enumeration  search only if justified                          15

18.2 The invariant

    The LLM may read, structure, and narrate. It may never compute a number that
    reaches a user, and it may never author a rule that reaches production.

18.3 Design-space distinctness (not objective-space)

V1 required generated options to be "distinct in objective space above a threshold." That is the
wrong space: two schemes can score far apart and be formally identical, or score nearly identically
and be completely different buildings.

Corrected: distinctness is measured in design space -- typology identifier, core typology, tower
plate aspect ratio (binned), floor count, podium level count. Two configurations are distinct if they
differ in typology or core type, or in 2 of the remaining dimensions. The threshold is a versioned
asset under FR-GOV-001.

18.4 Why not end-to-end generative

Non-reproducible, unexplainable, unfixable (a wrong setback can only be retrained, not corrected),
untestable per rule, and legally indefensible. It would also require a training corpus of approved
Dubai residential drawings that does not exist and could not be lawfully assembled.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                        48
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

Confidential -- internal working document            49
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                                  v2.0

19. Technical Architecture

19.1 Phase 0 architecture


 React + TypeScript SPA (single app)                 
 plot form · boundary draw · results ·               
 provenance tree · assumption register               

                     REST

 ONE Python FastAPI monolith                         
                                                     
 api/     thin handlers                              
 definitions/ metric definitions annex               
 rules/   typed records + evaluator reg. 
 geometry/ Shapely; exact predicates;                
          independent area recomputation 
 capacity/ envelope · parking · bands                
 invariants/  NO IMPORTS FROM capacity/ or 
                    generation/ (import-linted) 
 validation/  separate module, separate              
                    owner                            
 provenance/ emission at every boundary              
 report/  HTML  PDF; JSON                            
                                                     
 Runs execute synchronously (<10 s)                  

                                                     

 PostgreSQL + PostGIS · S3 (versioned)               


19.2 Explicitly removed from Phase 0

Removed             Why                                             Reintroduce when
Microservices       Eight services for a team of four pre-PMF is a  Team > 12, or independent scaling need
                    platform, not a product
Temporal / durable  Phase 0 runs are seconds, not minutes           Phase 5, when runs are long and resumable
workflow                                                            matters -- with run boundaries already
                    Nothing to cache at this latency                understood
Redis               No embeddings until Phase 2 similarity          When a measured cache-hit benefit exists
pgvector                                                            Phase 2, if vector search beats faceted scoring
                    Provenance is a bounded per-run DAG             on the retrieval eval
Graph DB            queried by root; Postgres recursive CTEs        If cross-run graph queries become a product
                    handle it                                       feature
Rule DSL +          Premature abstraction before rule 100
compiler                                                            ~Rule 100, when the shape is known
NSGA-II / pymoo
                    No search until enumeration is proven           Phase 5, with evidence
CP-SAT / OR-Tools   insufficient                                    Phase 4
Rhino /                                                             Never in the core path; optional interop only
Grasshopper         No packing until Phase 4                        Phase 1
DXF export
                    Windows-licensed, stateful, hard to
                    containerize; wrong in a SaaS critical path

                    JSON + PDF suffice for Phase 0

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                            50
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                       v2.0

19.3 Retained from V1 because retrofitting is a rewrite

Bitemporal rule storage · immutable runs · provenance emitted at every layer boundary · validator
as a separate module with a different owner · exact geometric predicates with independent area
recomputation · invariant layer (new, but same argument).

These are cheap now and unaffordable later. Everything else can wait.

19.4 Stack by phase

Phase Additions

0  Python 3.12, FastAPI, Shapely/GEOS, pyproj, PostgreSQL 16 + PostGIS, S3, React/TS, WeasyPrint, pytest

1  Background jobs (simple queue), DXF via ezdxf, XLSX via openpyxl

2  pgvector if it beats faceted scoring on the retrieval eval; data pipeline tooling

3  LLM API (zero-retention), layout-aware document parser, deterministic table parser, review UI

4  OR-Tools CP-SAT, 3D rendering (three.js), geometry kernel extension

5  pymoo, Temporal, Redis, autoscaling worker pool, surrogate model training

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                 51
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                               v2.0

20. UX Flow

20.1 Phase 0 flow

1. PLOT         form + boundary draw + edge classification
2. PARAMETERS   FAR, height, coverage, plate cap
3. RULES        + parking-in-FAR declaration (blocking, no default)
4. ASSUMPTIONS  applicable set, citations, inclusions/exclusions [ack gate]
5. CAPACITY     register, sensitivity-ranked, editable            [ack gate]
6. PARKING      bands A/B/C, governing band, binding constraints
7. CHECKS       demand, area, levels, headroom
8. EVIDENCE     invariants · validation · five-way claim statement
9. EXPORT       provenance tree, click-through from any number
                PDF + JSON                                        [reviewer gate]

Steps 1­4 are sequential and gated. Steps 5­9 are freely navigable.

20.2 The three moments that carry the product

 1. The parking-in-FAR declaration (step 2). A blocking question with no default. It signals
     immediately that the system will not guess on things that matter.

 2. The assumption register (step 4). The moment the user understands this is not magic. Non-
     skippable, sensitivity-ranked, inline-editable.

 3. Click-through provenance (everywhere). Every number is a link. This is the interaction that
     converts a skeptical architect.

20.3 Uncertainty as a first-class visual state

State                                      Treatment
DERIVED                                    Neutral, citation superscript
ASSUMED                                    Amber background, dotted underline, pencil affordance
USER_SET                                   User badge
OBSERVED                                   Distribution sparkline with n
VARIANCE                                   Red border, evidence link
Deferred / not assessed                    Grey, hatched, "not assessed" label

Uncertainty is not a tooltip.

20.4 Role lenses (Phase 1)

Role affects presentation order only. A development director sees GFA, unit count and value
proxy first; an architect sees efficiency, aspect ratios and core relationships first. Same
computation, same ranking. Divergent rankings by role would be a defect.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                         52
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                                          v2.0

21. Human Approval Gates

21.1 Run gates

Gate                                       Actor                           Blocks                                       Phase
G1 Plot & parameter confirmation           User                            Rule resolution                              0
G2 Rule set acknowledgement                User                            Capacity computation                         0
G3 Assumption register                     User                            Any export                                   0
acknowledgement
G4 Named reviewer on export                User                            External sharing                             0
G5 Brief contradiction resolution
                                           User                            Configuration                                1
G6 Variance review
                                                                           enumeration

                                           Second user (tenant-configurable; default on for Variance application        1

                                           multi-seat)

21.2 Shared asset gates (Principle 10)

The gates V1 missed. These have higher blast radius than run gates, because they affect every
customer at once.

Asset                                      Approver                        Why it needs a gate
Rule publication
Life-safety rule                           Qualified regulatory architect  Legal consequence

Default assumption values                  + fire/life-safety specialist   Highest-consequence class
                                           (second reviewer)
Metric definitions annex
                                           Regulatory architect + product  Changing a default bay-area factor silently
Typology library entries                                                   changes every customer's capacity

Objective normalization                    Architect + design partner sign- Root of every computed value
functions                                  off
Deferred / non-mechanizable
classification                             Regulatory architect            Each is a design assertion shipped to every
Adjudication records (§11.6)                                               customer
Design-space distinctness
threshold                                  Product + development director Determines rankings

                                           Regulatory architect            Determines what the report claims not to have
                                                                           checked -- a liability statement
                                           Regulatory architect
                                           Computational design lead       Resolves conflicts that have no defined order

                                                                           Determines what users see as "different options"

Every one is versioned, changelogged, and triggers impacted-run identification within 24 h. Past
runs are never mutated.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                                      53
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                              v2.0

22. Evaluation Framework

22.1 Layers

Layer               What                             Method                      Phase Gate
E0 -- Invariants    Arithmetic coherence
                                                     Automated, every artifact incl. 0   100%
                                                     docs

E1 -- Rules         Rule correctness                 3 tests each, boundary +    0       100% pass

                                                     negative

E2 -- Geometry      Envelope and area                Golden set, independent     0       0.1% self, band-match
                    correctness                      recomputation
                                                                                         vs. architects

E3 -- Professional  Does a qualified                 Two-architect golden set (§23) 0    8/10 within band
agreement           architect agree?

E4 -- Extraction    Field accuracy                   Held-out gold set           3       95% critical
                                                                                         Coverage 80% and
E5 -- Precedent     Do estimates match               Held-out approved projects  2       sharpness 20%
backtest            outcomes?                                                            70%,  0.6

E6 -- Generation    Are the floors any               Blind architect panel with real- 4  40% baseline
quality             good?                            floor controls

E7 -- Decision impact Did it change the              Customer-reported carry-    1+
                                         outcome?
                                                     through

22.2 The inter-architect variance measurement -- do this first

Week 1 of Phase 0, before any engine code. Give three qualified architects the same three plots
with the same data packs and ask for buildable envelope, permitted GFA, and parking demand.

Expected spread on setback interpretation, edge classification, and projection treatment: 4­8%. If
that is what it is, then a 2% accuracy target against a single architect's answer is measuring noise,
and the product claim changes from "accurate" to "consistent, explicit, and reproducible" -- which
is a stronger and more defensible claim anyway, and it should be measured before it is marketed.

22.3 Metrics that are absolute

ID           Metric                                                                                      Target
M-INV        Emitted artifacts passing invariants                                                        100%
M-PRV        Emitted values with a provenance class and complete derivation                              100%
M-APP        Rules reaching production without a named approver                                          0
M-PRE        Precedent nodes in constraint derivation paths                                              0
M-DEF        Reports listing their deferred checks                                                       100%
M-RUN        Immutable-run reproducibility (§13.4 definition)                                            100%

These are integrity properties, not quality targets. Any failure is a release blocker.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                        54
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                         v2.0

22.4 Metrics that must be paired

Metric                 Must be paired with           Why
Backtest coverage 80%  Sharpness 20%                 Coverage alone is gamed by widening the band
Self-consistency PASS  Rule coverage %               Passing constraints you did not encode is meaningless
Extraction accuracy    Queue-vs-drop rate            99% accuracy on 60% of statements is not 99% accuracy

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                   55
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                            v2.0

23. Golden Dataset

23.1 Composition (Phase 0)

Item                                       Quantity Source                          Purpose
Real plots, one community, one land                                                 Golden set
use                                        10        Design-partner land packs
Independent architect computations
per plot                                   2         Two architects, blind to each  Ground truth and variance
Mechanized rules                           ~40       other                          measurement
                                           120                                      Rule base
Rule test cases                            1 annex   Authored by the project
Metric definitions                                   architect                      E1
                                                                                    Root dependency
                                                     Concurrent with authoring

                                                     Architect + partner sign-off

Total external data dependency: ten land packs from one friendly developer. No municipal
negotiation. No open-data licensing. No scraping.

23.2 Why two architects, not one

A single architect's answer is not ground truth -- it is one sample from a distribution whose width
nobody has measured. Two independent computations give:

 1. A band, not a point. The engine target becomes "within the band," which is an honest and
     defensible claim.

 2. The variance figure itself, which is a headline product asset. If architects disagree by 6%, "we
     are consistent and reproducible" is a stronger pitch than "we are accurate."

 3. Detection of engine bias. Systematically landing at one architect's end of the band is a signal
     worth investigating.

23.3 The circularity, acknowledged

The golden set requires FAR, height and setbacks per plot -- the same plot data the engine needs
and which may not be on the affection plan. This is why the golden set comes from design-
partner land packs, not from public sources. It also makes the golden-set exercise a direct test
of assumption A1 (§27): of ten land packs, how many actually contained FAR, height and setbacks
without further enquiry? That number is a Phase 0 deliverable in its own right.

23.4 Rule test requirements

Every rule: 1 positive, 1 boundary (at the threshold), 1 negative (applicability correctly
excludes). Boundary cases matter most -- threshold-dependent rules switching at the wrong point is
the highest-frequency rule defect.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                      56
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                v2.0

24. MVP Acceptance Criteria

"MVP" here means Phase 0 complete and shipped to design partners. Phase 1 acceptance is
§4.4.

24.1 Functional

  · [ ] Metric definitions annex signed, versioned, cited in every report
  · [ ] Parking-in-FAR treatment declared per project; no default; blocking
  · [ ] Plot entry with boundary draw and mandatory edge classification, 3 min
  · [ ] ~40 rules as typed records, all nine Principle-9 fields non-null, all approved by a named

     human
  · [ ] Every rule classified generative / filtering / evaluative-only / deferred
  · [ ] Buildable envelope with binding constraint named per dimension
  · [ ] Parking demand  area  levels  headroom, with cited ratios
  · [ ] Capacity bands A, B, C with derivations; governing band named
  · [ ] Integer granularity loss reported
  · [ ] User realism discount, default 1.00, USER_SET
  · [ ] Assumption register, sensitivity-ranked, inline-editable, non-skippable
  · [ ] Invariant layer: 18 checks, independent module, blocks emission
  · [ ] Independent validation with the five-way claim statement
  · [ ] Provenance graph, click-through from any number
  · [ ] Deferred-check list in every output
  · [ ] PDF + JSON export; JSON round-trips
  · [ ] Immutable-run reproducibility per §13.4

24.2 Quality

  · [ ] M-INV, M-PRV, M-APP, M-DEF, M-RUN all at 100% / 0
  · [ ] Independent area recomputation agrees 0.1% on all golden plots
  · [ ] Engine within the two-architect band on 8 of 10 golden plots
  · [ ] Full computation < 10 s
  · [ ] Every worked example in every product document passes the invariant layer in CI

24.3 Measurement deliverables (equal weight to the software)

  · [ ] Inter-architect variance measured and published
  · [ ] Mechanization rate on the first 40 rules measured
  · [ ] Rule authoring throughput measured, by complexity class
  · [ ] Land-pack completeness rate measured (of 10, how many carried FAR/height/setbacks)
  · [ ] Provenance-tree engagement observed in 3 user sessions

24.4 Governance

  · [ ] Every shared asset versioned with a named approver
  · [ ] Import linter enforcing invariant and validator module independence, in CI
  · [ ] Professional-use disclaimer reviewed by UAE counsel

Confidential -- internal working document                                                          57
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                    v2.0

· [ ] No marketing material claiming compliance verification, guarantee, or assurance

Confidential -- internal working document                                              58
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                                   v2.0

25. Risk Register

ID Risk                         Likelihood Impact Mitigation                                               Owner

R-01  Team builds generation    High       Critical  Phase gating with dependency argument (§1.3);         Product
      first because it demos                         Phase 0 must ship before Phase 1 starts
      well

R-02 Land packs lack FAR /      High       High      Measured in Phase 0 as a deliverable; blocking        Product
           height / setbacks                         OPEN state rather than silent default; if <5/10, the
                                                     product's first job is data assembly -- a different
                                                     product

R-03 Inter-architect variance Medium       High      Measured week 1; if high, reposition from             Product
           > 10%                                     "accurate" to "consistent and auditable" before
                                                     marketing

R-04 Mechanization rate <       Medium     High      Measured on first 40 rules; re-scope to a smaller,    Reg.
           50%                                       better-defended parameter set                         Architect

R-05  Rule authoring slower     High       High      Measured; the first 40 rules run 3­5× slow because    Reg.
      than 4/day on complex                          schema is co-designed. Budget 14­18 architect-        Architect
      rules                                          weeks for 300 rules, not 6­10

R-06  Public precedent data     High       High      Stated as expected (§17.1); Path B partner            Data Lead
      lacks NSA, mix,                                portfolios are the primary Tier B source;
      permitted FAR                                  INSUFFICIENT_PRECEDENT degrades gracefully

R-07 Professional liability     Low        Critical  Disclaimers, PI insurance before first paying         CEO /
                                                     customer, human gates, five-way claim statement,      Counsel
                                                     marketing review on the same footing as product

R-08 Precedent corpus           Medium     High      Licence gate on ingestion owned by a named            Data Lead
           copyright exposure                        person; no scraping of marketed plans

R-09  Nested optimizer          High       Medium    Enumeration in Phase 1 defers the problem             Comp.
      misses runtime budget                          entirely; §8.4 costs it honestly before Phase 5       Design
      by 10×                                         design is chosen                                      Lead

R-10  Geometric degeneracy      Medium     High      Exact predicates; double area computation;            Eng Lead
      produces a plausible                           degenerate results raise rather than return;
      wrong answer                                   invariant layer

R-11  Users read self-          High       Critical Five-way claim statement verbatim in every report; Product
      consistency as                                       marketing prohibition; disclaimer
      compliance

R-12 Assumption treated as      High       High      Amber everywhere, non-skippable register,             Design
           fact                                      quantified sensitivity

R-13  Regulatory architect      High       High      Recruit before engineering ramp; founding-team        CEO
      hiring is the schedule's                       role, not a hire
      binding constraint

R-14  Shared-asset change       Medium     High      FR-GOV-001; impacted-run notification; past runs      Eng Lead
      silently alters every                          never mutated
      customer's numbers

R-15  Non-scalar conflicts      Medium     Medium §11.6: REQUIRES_ADJUDICATION halts rather                Reg.
      resolved arbitrarily at                              than guesses                                    Architect
      runtime

R-16 Occupant-load fixpoint Low            Medium §11.7: bounded at 5 iterations, conservative seed,       Comp.
           fails to converge                               user declaration on non-convergence             Design
                                                                                                           Lead

R-17 Road hierarchy layer       Medium     Low       Phase 0 makes edge classification manual;             Data Lead
                                                     automation is a Phase 3+ convenience, not a
      unavailable for                                dependency

      automated edge

      classification

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                             59
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                          v2.0

ID Risk  Likelihood Impact Mitigation                                                                 Owner
                                                                                                      CEO
R-18 Customers reject Phase Medium         High      Tested in Phase 0 with design partners; the CEO
           0 as "just a calculator"                  brief (§31) is the counter-argument; if true,
                                                     accelerate Phase 1

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                    60
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2            v2.0

26. Kill / Re-scope Criteria

Agreed in advance so they are evidence-triggered, not argued.

Finding                         Threshold            Action
Inter-architect variance        > 10%
                                < 50%                Accuracy is not the value proposition. Reposition around consistency,
Mechanization rate on first 40                       explicitness and auditability. Rewrite marketing before shipping.
rules                           < 4/day
                                                     The compliance surface is too thin to claim coverage. Re-scope to a
Rule authoring throughput on    < 5 of 10            narrower, better-defended parameter set and reduce the claimed rule
complex rules                                        count publicly.
                                < 1 of 3
Land packs containing FAR +     sessions             Knowledge-base cost is ~3× budget. Either raise on that basis or
height + setbacks               < 6 of 10            narrow the jurisdiction slice further. Do not proceed on the original
                                Either missed        estimate.
Users opening the provenance    < 60%
tree                            Not                  The input model is wrong. The product's first job is data assembly,
Engine within two-architect     demonstrated         not computation -- that is a different product and needs a different
band                                                 plan.
Phase 2 backtest coverage or
sharpness                                            The trust thesis is wrong. Everything downstream of §13 needs re-
Phase 4 architect panel                              examination before Phase 1.

Phase 1 enumeration                                  Do not ship. Diagnose whether it is rules, geometry, or definitions.
insufficient at production                           Fixing the wrong one wastes a quarter.
granularity
                                                     Historically-observed capacity does not ship. Keep the user-entered
                                                     discount.

                                                     Phase 4 does not ship. Phases 0­3 remain the product. Pre-
                                                     authorized.

                                                     Phase 5 search does not begin. Enumeration stays.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                                   61
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2            v2.0

27. Open Questions

ID Question                                Owner      Needed   Consequence if unresolved
                                                      by       Changes capacity 15­35%. Currently OPEN
Q1 Does parking count toward               Reg.                REGULATORY QUESTION and blocking per FR-
                                                      Phase 0  DEF-002.
     FAR in the target jurisdiction Architect         week 2   If FAR is 3­5, a 2,000 m² plot is a small point block,
                                                               not a tower -- and much of the generation
     slice?                                           Phase 0  machinery targets the wrong problem size
                                                      week 1   Sets the accuracy target and the marketing claim
Q2 What are typical FAR values for         Product
          target plots?                                        Sizes the whole business

Q3 Inter-architect variance on             Reg.       Phase 0  Tests assumption A1
          envelope and capacity?           Architect  week 2
                                                      Phase 0  Determines whether edge classification can ever
Q4 What fraction of the governing          Reg.       week 8   be automated
          residential-tower rule set is    Architect
          mechanizable?                               Phase 0  Validates or invalidates the phase-gating strategy
                                                      week 3
Q5 Do land packs actually contain          Product    Phase 3  Determines whether Path A can support calibration
          FAR, height and setbacks?                            at all -- expected answer is no
                                                      Phase 0
Q6 Does a road-hierarchy GIS layer Data Lead          week 10  The core calibration parameter
          exist and join cleanly to cadastral         Phase 2
          edges?                                      start    Determines whether Phase 5 is needed at all

Q7 Will developers pay for Phase 0         CEO        Phase 2  Could change positioning or pricing
          capacity alone?
                                                      Phase 1  Sizes maintenance and the durability of the moat
Q8 Do public municipal datasets            Data Lead  end
                                                               Shapes the recommendation UX
     carry NSA, unit mix, or permitted                Phase 0
                                                      week 8
     FAR?
                                                      Phase 1
Q9 What is the real distribution of        Data Lead
          achieved vs. permitted FAR?                 Phase 1

Q10  Is exhaustive enumeration             Comp.
     sufficient at production              Design
     granularity?                          Lead

Q11  What PI insurance is obtainable,      CEO
     at what premium, for this
     description of product?

Q12 How frequently do the governing        Reg.
          instruments actually change?     Architect

Q13  Do customers accept a set of          Product
     options, or demand a single
     answer?

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                              62
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                             v2.0

28. Data Acquisition Plan

28.1 By phase

Phase Needed                               Source                  Difficulty      Blocking?
                                           Design partner          Low             Yes -- but one relationship
0  10 land packs, one
                                           Published               Low             Yes
   community
                                           Commercial              Low             No
0  Regulatory source                       Contracted architects   Low             Yes

   documents                               Customer                Low             No

0  Basemap tiles                           Architect-authored      Medium          Yes (Phase 1)

0  2× architect                            Architect-authored      Medium          Yes (Phase 1)
                                           Municipal open data,    Medium          No
   computations ×10                        commercial licence
                                           2­3 developer partners  High            Yes for Tier B
1  Developer standards                                             (relationship)
                                                                   Medium          No -- manual fallback
   documents                                                       Medium          Yes (Phase 3)
                                                                   Very high       No -- Phase 4 does not
1  Unit-type dimensional                                                           depend on it

   library

1  Typology library (4­6)

2  Public permit / building

   datasets

2  Partner project portfolios

2  Cadastral plot geometry                 Licensing

3  Extraction gold sets                    Internal labelling

4  Approved floor plates                   Partner or municipal

   (Tier A)

28.2 Minimum viable precedent dataset (Phase 2)

Path A target -- breadth. For 300 Dubai residential towers approved since 2010, ten fields: plot
reference, community, approval date, land use, plot area, built-up area, floors above, floors below,
unit count, parking bays. Sufficient for density, floor-count and parking-ratio benchmarking. Not
sufficient for efficiency or achieved-vs-permitted FAR.

Path B target -- depth. From 2­3 developer partners, 40+ projects with additionally: permitted
FAR, NSA, unit mix, achieved efficiency. This is the only realistic source of Tier B, and Tier B is
what makes the historically-observed capacity concept credible.

If Path B fails: the historically-observed band does not ship. Users keep the USER_SET realism
discount. Benchmarking still works on Path A fields. The product degrades; it does not break. This is
designed-in, not improvised.

28.3 What to ask a municipality for, in order

Tier 1 (likely obtainable): bulk/API access to published permit, building summary, floor-level,
building usage and project datasets with a commercial licence permitting derivative analytical use;
schema documentation; historical depth; licence clarification for a commercial derivative product;
plot-level cadastral geometry under licence.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                       63
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                              v2.0

Tier 2 (requires relationship, transformative): approved GFA and permitted FAR per project;
unit schedules and mix; structured setback and height conditions per plot; aggregated approval-
cycle statistics; anonymized variance/exemption grant statistics by parameter.

Tier 3 (long horizon, do not plan around): approved drawing files; review comment text;
submissionrevisionapproval sequences.

Do not make any roadmap contingent on Tier 2 or Tier 3.

28.4 Licensing discipline

Licence review is a gate on ingestion, owned by a named person, before any record enters the
corpus -- not a cleanup task. Marketed floor plans, broker listings and consultant drawings are
protected works. Scraping them creates exposure that surfaces at diligence.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                        64
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                                       v2.0

29. Corrections Applied from Red Team

# Issue                        Resolution                                                                        Section

1 "100% run                    Replaced with immutable run reproducibility -- outputs and provenance             §13.4
       reproducibility"        always retrievable and recomputable from persisted artifacts; pipeline re-
       impossible              execution explicitly not guaranteed

2 No invariant layer           Added: 18 conservation checks, independent module, blocks emission, runs on §12
                               documentation examples

3 Area terminology             MetricDefinition annex as FR-DEF-001, signed week 1, root dependency,             §9.1,
       undefined               cited in every report                                                             §10.2

4 Parking-in-FAR               Explicit OPEN REGULATORY QUESTION ; blocking user declaration; both               FR-
       unstated                scenarios computable; never ASSUMED                                               DEF-002

5 "Realistic band"             Removed from Phases 0­1 by schema. Replaced with USER_SET discount.               §15.3,
       without data            Reintroduced in Phase 2 only under n8 + coverage + sharpness gates                §5.4

6 DSL premature                Typed rule records + evaluator registry capped at 12; DSL extraction at ~rule     §11.1
                               100

7 Over-engineered              Microservices, Temporal, Redis, pgvector, graph DB removed from Phase 0 with §19.2
       infrastructure          named reintroduction conditions

8 Geometry generality          Phase 0 restricted to rectilinear/simple convex, enforced via shape_class at §14.1
       assumed                 the data layer

9 NSGA-II / CP-SAT             Removed from Phases 0­1; enumeration instead; introduced in Phase 5 only on §4.3, §8.3
       premature               evidence

10 "All rules constructive" Three rule classes: GENERATIVE , FILTERING , EVALUATIVE_ONLY , plus                  §11.3

impossible                     DEFERRED

11 Occupant-load               Bounded monotone fixpoint: conservative seed, convergence on rule-set             §11.7
       circularity unresolved  identity, 5-iteration bound, user declaration on non-convergence

12 Non-scalar conflicts        Partial order defined per parameter type; REQUIRES_ADJUDICATION halts             §11.6
       undefined               and demands a versioned human adjudication record; IRRECONCILABLE
                               reports infeasibility

13 Similarity undefined        Three stages: regime gate, per-domain faceted vector, transferability. No         §17.4
                               composite headline percentage.

14 Confidence                  Two labels: CALIBRATED_CONFIDENCE (may gate) and                                  §6.5
       uncalibrated            HEURISTIC_CONFIDENCE (display only, never gates)

15 No shared-asset gates FR-GOV-001 covering rules, defaults, definitions, typologies, normalizations,           §21.2
                                               deferred classifications, adjudications, distinctness thresholds

16 Worked examples             All V1 examples withdrawn. New example derived from first principles and CI-      Appendix
       arithmetically invalid  verified against the invariant layer                                              A

17 Backtest coverage           Paired with a sharpness requirement                                               §5.4,
       gameable                                                                                                  §22.4

18 Distinctness in             Corrected to design space                                                         §18.3
       objective space

19 Validator                   §16.4 states the honest limit; five-way claim statement replaces "0% violations §16.4,
       independence
       oversold                = compliant"                                                                      §16.5

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                                  65
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                       v2.0

Appendix A -- Worked Example (Invariant-
Verified)

Every number below was computed by the invariant checker and passes all applicable checks
in §12.2. The verification script is part of the CI suite. Figures are illustrative of the method;
parameter values are marked with their provenance class.

A.1 Inputs                                 Value                      Class
                                           80.0 × 40.0 m              USER_SET
  Item                                     3,200.0 m²                 DERIVED (computed, matches stated)
  Plot dimensions                          RECTILINEAR                DERIVED
  Plot area                                Residential -- multi-unit  USER_SET
  Shape class                              ROAD, collector            USER_SET
  Land use                                 ADJACENT_PLOT              USER_SET
  North edge (80 m)                        5.0                        USER_SET (from plot data sheet)
  Other three edges                        100.0 m                    USER_SET (from plot data sheet)
  FAR maximum                              60%                        USER_SET (from plot data sheet)
  Height maximum                           40% of plot = 1,280.0 m²   USER_SET
  Coverage maximum                         6.0 m                      DERIVED -- rule R-SETBACK-ROAD-RES
  Tower plate cap                          4.5 m                      DERIVED -- rule R-SETBACK-SIDE-RES
  Road-edge setback                        No                         USER_SET -- declared; Q1 is OPEN
  Other-edge setback                       4.5 m                      ASSUMED
  Parking counts toward FAR                3.5 m                      ASSUMED
  Ground floor-to-floor                    3.2 m                      ASSUMED
  Podium floor-to-floor                    2 (+1 basement)            USER_SET
  Typical floor-to-floor                   32.0 m²/bay                ASSUMED
  Podium levels available                  92%                        ASSUMED
  Bay area factor                          1.00                       USER_SET (default)
  Podium usable-for-parking fraction
  Realism discount

A.2 Envelope                   Computation                                        Result      Binding
                               (80 - 4.5 - 4.5) × (40 - 6.0 - 4.5) = 71.0 × 29.5  2,094.5 m²  --
  Step                         3,200 × 0.60                                       1,920.0 m²  --
  Setback-permitted footprint  min(2,094.5, 1,920.0)                              1,920.0 m²  Coverage
  Coverage cap                  min(podium footprint, 1,280.0)                    1,060.0 m²  Within cap
  Podium footprint             4.5 + 2 × 3.5                                      11.5 m      --
  Tower plate (selected)
  Base height

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                 66
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                           v2.0

Step                         Computation             Result                                   Binding
Height available for tower   100.0 - 11.5            88.5 m                                   Height ceiling

A.3 Capacity bands

Band                 Derivation                                                               GFA
                     FAR 5.0 × 3,200 = 16,000 permitted. Ground 1,920 + 13 tower floors ×     15,700 m²
A -- Regulation-     1,060 = 15,700 (a 14th floor would exceed 16,000)
limited              88.5 / 3.2 = 27 tower floors. 1,920 + 27 × 1,060                         30,540 m²

B -- Geometry-       Supply 165 bays ÷ 1.519 bays/unit = 108 units  13.5 floors  13 floors    15,700 m²
limited
                     min(A, B, C)                                                             15,700 m² -- Band
C -- Parking-                                                                                 A (FAR)
limited                                                                                       300 m² (1.88% of
                                                                                              permitted)
Governing

Integer granularity  16,000 - 15,700
loss

Headroom: 46.9 m of unused height (14 further floors) exists geometrically but is forbidden by
FAR. Parking headroom is 7 bays (4.4%) -- near-binding.

A.4 Configuration                          Value
                                           13
  Item                                     11.5 + 13 × 3.2 = 53.1 m ( 100.0 )
  Tower floors                             8 -- 4 × 1-bed, 3 × 2-bed, 1 × 3-bed
  Total height                             1-bed 70, 2-bed 110, 3-bed 160 m²
  Units per floor                          4×70 + 3×110 + 1×160 = 770 m²
  Unit NSA                                 1,060 m² (core + circulation + services = 290 m²)
  NSA per floor                            770 / 1,060 = 72.64%
  Tower plate gross                        13 × 8 = 104
  Tower efficiency                         52 / 39 / 13 = 50.0% / 37.5% / 12.5%
  Total units                              13 × 770 = 10,010 m²
  Achieved mix                             10,010 / 15,700 = 63.76%
  Total NSA                                1,920 + 13,780 = 15,700 m²
  Whole-building efficiency                15,700 / 3,200 = 4.906 ( 5.0 )
  Total GFA                                1,920 / 3,200 = 60.0% (= cap )
  Achieved FAR
  Coverage

Note the two efficiency figures. Tower efficiency 72.64%; whole-building efficiency 63.76%.
They differ because the 1,920 m² ground floor carries no saleable area. This is exactly why
FR-DEF-001 exists. A report quoting "efficiency" without a scope is meaningless, and the gap
between these two numbers is 8.9 percentage points -- larger than most of the differences
developers argue about.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                        67
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                                        v2.0

A.5 Parking                Computation                                    Result
                           52 × 1.0                                       52.0
  Item                     39 × 1.5                                       58.5
  1-bed @ 1.0 bay          13 × 2.0                                       26.0
  2-bed @ 1.5 bay          136.5                                          137
  3-bed @ 2.0 bay          0.15 × 137                                     21
  Resident subtotal                                                       158 bays
  Visitor @ 15%            158 × 32.0                                     5,056 m²
  Required                 (1 basement + 2 podium) × 1,920 × 0.92         5,299 m²
  Required area            5,299 / 32.0                                   165 bays
  Supply area              165 - 158                                      7 bays (4.4%)
  Supply
  Headroom

A.6 Assumption register (top 3 by sensitivity)

Rank Assumption            Value           Class     Impact if perturbed
                           32.0
1       Bay area factor    m²/bay          ASSUMED   At 35.0: supply falls to 151 bays < 158 required. Scheme
                                                     infeasible. Must drop to 12 floors  96 units, 145 bays
                           3.2 m                     required, 14,640 m² GFA. Cost: -1,060 m² GFA, -8 units.

2       Typical floor-to-  92%             ASSUMED Height is not binding (53.1 of 100 m used), so no effect on this plot.
                                                             Would bind on a plot with a lower height ceiling.
        floor

3       Podium usable                      ASSUMED At 88%: supply 158 bays. Headroom falls to 0. Any demand increase
                                                             makes the scheme infeasible.
        fraction

The assumption ranked first changes the answer. A 3 m²/bay difference -- well within normal
variation between basement and podium layouts -- removes a floor. This is the register earning its
place: without it, the 13-floor answer looks like a fact.

A.7 Invariant results

ID      Check                                        Result
INV-01   level GFA = total GFA                       1,920 + 13,780 = 15,700 
INV-02   unit NSA + core/circ = plate                770 + 290 = 1,060 
INV-03  GFA / plot = FAR                             15,700 / 3,200 = 4.906 
INV-04   units by type = unit count                  52 + 39 + 13 = 104 
INV-05   mix shares = 1.000                          0.500 + 0.375 + 0.125 = 1.000 
INV-06  count × mean NSA = total NSA                 104 × 96.25 = 10,010 
INV-07  Efficiency = NSA/GFA at stated scope         tower 0.7264, whole 0.6376  (both scoped)
INV-08  Podium  setback-permitted                    1,920  2,094.5 
INV-09  Podium  coverage cap                         1,920  1,920 
INV-10  Plate  podium and  cap                       1,060  1,920,  1,280 
INV-11   heights = total  ceiling                    53.1  100.0 

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                                  68
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                 v2.0

ID      Check                                        Result
INV-12  Bays × factor  available area                5,056  5,299 
INV-13  Bays  demand                                 165  158 
INV-16  Governing = min(A,B,C), labelled             min(15,700; 30,540; 15,700) = 15,700, Band A 
INV-17  Achieved FAR  permitted                      4.906  5.0 
INV-18  Composition matches FAR treatment            Parking (5,299 m²) excluded per declaration 

All checks pass.

A.8 Five-way claim statement for this example

SELF-CONSISTENCY        PASS -- all 18 invariants, all encoded constraints
RULE COVERAGE           40 of 61 identified applicable requirements
                        encoded. 21 deferred, listed in the report.
GEOMETRIC VALIDITY      Coverage 66%.
REGULATORY VALIDITY     PASS -- areas independently recomputed, max
PROFESSIONAL AGREEMENT  deviation 0.00%
                        NOT ASSESSED
                        Engine within the two-architect band on 8 of 10
                        golden plots. Measured inter-architect variance
                        on this community: <to be populated in Phase 0>

Confidential -- internal working document                                                           69
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

30. WHAT WE KNOW

Statements we can support with a citation, a measurement, or direct verification. Nothing in this
list is inferred.

30.1 Regulatory and jurisdictional

 1. Dubai Law No. (16) of 2023 assigns Dubai Municipality exclusive responsibility for regulating
     urban planning in the emirate. Free zone and special development zone authorities may impose
     additional requirements on top of DM requirements, and route permit applications through DM
     for structure- and framework-plan compliance. (Jurisdiction is overlay composition, not rulebook
     switching.)

 2. The Dubai 2040 Urban Master Plan is the statutory structure plan under that law.
 3. Dubai Law No. (3) of 2026 concerning quality and safety of buildings applies emirate-wide

     including private development zones and free zones such as DIFC, assigns enforcement to Dubai
     Municipality, and provides for a central building database.
 4. Formal mechanisms exist for exemption from planning and construction regulations, and for
     modification of permitted land use. (This is why the variance model exists.)
 5. The affection plan is a high-level general site plan carrying plot number, land-use classification
     and particular zoning requirements, and indicating which further permissions are required. It is
     not guaranteed to carry FAR, height limits, or full setback schedules.
 6. A consolidated Dubai Building Code exists and is issued by Dubai Municipality.

30.2 Data availability

 1. Dubai Pulse publishes municipal datasets including building permits, building summary
     information, building floor level information, building usages, and project/project-application
     records, with CSV download and authenticated API access under the emirate's data
     dissemination framework.

 2. DLD land and transaction datasets are published through the same channel.

30.3 Verified by our own computation

 1. The worked example in Appendix A is arithmetically self-consistent and passes all 18 invariant
     checks. (Verified in CI.)

 2. The V1 worked examples were not self-consistent -- errors of ~2.8× on GFA and ~3× on unit
     count, with the document's own contradiction checker disagreeing with its own output by 3×.
     (Verified; those examples are withdrawn.)

 3. Nested evolutionary-over-solver optimization at population 100 × 50 generations × 2 s inner
     solve requires ~2.8 CPU-hours per run. (Direct arithmetic.)

30.4 Technical facts

 1. Constraint checking and invariant checking answer different questions. Constraints ask what is
     permitted; invariants ask whether the arithmetic closes. Only the second catches an impossible
     configuration.

 2. Topological rules (travel distance, exit separation) have no constructive inverse and cannot
     generate geometry.

 3. Implementation independence between validator and generator does not confer semantic
     independence -- both evaluate the same encoded constraint set.

Confidential -- internal working document            70
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                              v2.0

4. Backtest coverage without a sharpness constraint is gameable by widening the interval.

5. Provenance must be emitted at every layer boundary; retrofitting it requires rewriting every
   layer.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                        71
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                                       v2.0

31. WHAT WE ARE ASSUMING

Unvalidated beliefs. Each carries a test and a consequence. None of these is treated as a fact
anywhere in this document, and none may be quoted as one.

31.1 Dangerous -- test in Phase 0

ID Assumption                              Why dangerous      Test                  If false

A1 Design-partner land packs               The entire input model Phase 0 §23.3 --  Product's first job is data
        contain FAR, height and                                                     assembly, not computation.
        setbacks                           depends on it      count of 10           Different product, different plan.

A2 Two qualified architects agree          Sets the accuracy  Week 1, three plots,  Reposition from "accurate" to
        within ~5% on a buildable          target and the     three architects      "consistent and auditable" before
        envelope                           marketing claim                          any marketing

A3 50% of governing residential- Sizes the whole              First 40 rules        Narrow the parameter set; reduce
                                                                                    claimed coverage publicly
     tower rules are mechanizable          business

A4 Rule authoring reaches 8+/day 3× cost swing                Measured              Budget 14­18 architect-weeks per
        after the schema stabilizes                           throughput by         300 rules; raise on that basis
                                                              complexity class

A5 Parking has a determinable,             15­35% capacity    Q1, week 2            Stays OPEN REGULATORY
        citable treatment under FAR        swing                                    QUESTION permanently; user
                                                                                    declares per project

A6 Users will engage with                  The trust thesis   Session observation Re-examine everything
        provenance rather than                                                                   downstream of §13
        treating output as an oracle

31.2 Significant -- test in Phases 1­2

ID Assumption                                        Test                 If false
                                                     Phase 0 design-
A7 Developers will pay for capacity                  partner conversion   Accelerate Phase 1; Phase 0 becomes an
          computation alone                          Phase 1              internal foundation rather than a product
                                                     measurement
A8 Exhaustive enumeration over 4­6                                        Phase 5 becomes necessary; budget §8.4
          typologies is sufficient at production     Phase 2 partnership  mitigations
          granularity                                effort
                                                                          Tier B unavailable; historically-observed
A9 2­3 developer partners will contribute            Phase 2 profiling    capacity does not ship; USER_SET discount
          historical portfolios under contract                            persists
                                                     Architect review,
A10 Public municipal data lacks NSA, mix and         Phase 1              Good news -- Path A becomes viable for
          permitted FAR                                                   calibration and Phase 2 accelerates
                                                     Phase 1 onboarding
A11  Curated parametric typologies capture                                Typology library must expand substantially, or
     the majority of viable residential-tower                             free-form generation becomes necessary far
     configurations                                                       earlier than planned

A12 Standards hard/soft classification can be                             Onboarding cost rises materially; may need to
          elicited in a single onboarding session                         be billable

31.3 Structural -- carried, monitored

ID Assumption                                                             Monitoring
                                                                          Q12 -- measure actual change frequency
A13 Dubai's regulatory framework is stable enough that a rule base
          retains value between updates

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                                 72
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                                        v2.0

ID Assumption                                                             Monitoring
                                                                          Hiring pipeline; this is the schedule's binding
A14 A qualified regulatory architect is hirable as a full-time founding-  constraint (R-13)
          team member                                                     Q11, Phase 0 week 8

A15 Professional indemnity insurance is obtainable for this product       Instrument from Phase 1 even though nothing
          description at a viable premium                                 uses it until much later
                                                                          Design review before Phase 4
A16 Approval-outcome data will eventually be capturable from
          customers, making it the durable moat                           Phase 1 shared-link engagement

A17 Non-convex plot geometry can be addressed in Phase 4 without
          invalidating the Phase 0 kernel

A18 Architects will act as a distribution channel rather than resisting
          the product

31.4 The assumptions V1 made silently, now surfaced

V1 silent assumption                                  Status in V2
The affection plan carries development parameters     Rejected. Known false (§30.1 item 5). CRITICAL_INPUT_GAP
                                                      handling.
Municipal data will supply efficiency and permitted   Rejected. Expected false (A10). Path B is the primary Tier B
FAR                                                   source.
A "realistic" capacity band could be produced at MVP  Rejected. Removed by schema until §5.4 gates are met.
Every rule can be made constructive                   Rejected. Three rule classes (§11.3).
"Most restrictive wins" is universally defined        Rejected. Undefined for enums and topological rules (§11.6).
The validator agreeing with the generator means       Rejected. Five-way claim statement (§16.5).
compliance
MVP in 6 months                                       Rejected. Phase 0 in 8­12 weeks; full vision 18­24 months.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                                  73
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                                   v2.0

32. Phase 0 Implementation Plan (8­12 weeks)

32.1 Team -- four people

Role                          FTE Notes

Regulatory Architect          1.0 Owns the rule base and the definitions annex. The single most important hire.
(licensed, Dubai practice)              Full team member with veto over rule publication, not an advisor.

Senior Backend / Geometry 1.0 Geometry kernel, capacity engine, provenance
Engineer

Full-stack Engineer           1.0 API, frontend, report generation. Owns the invariant and validation modules
                                        -- different owner from the capacity engine (Principle 4).

Product / Tech Lead           1.0 Scope discipline, data wrangling, design-partner relationship, measurement

No AI/ML engineer. There is no LLM in Phase 0. Contracted: 3 architects for the variance
measurement and golden set (~10 days total).

32.2 Schedule

Week Work                                                                               Deliverable

1     Metric definitions annex drafted and signed. Parameter vocabulary for ~40 rules. Signed annex; variance

      Inter-architect variance measurement, 3 plots, 3 architects. Secure 10            figure; land-pack

      land packs. Q1 (parking-in-FAR) research begins.                                  completeness count

2     Rule record schema, evaluator registry (12), bitemporal store, test harness,      Rule model + first 10 rules

      approval workflow. Architect begins authoring. Repo skeleton with import linter.

3     Geometry kernel: per-edge offsets, intersection, area with independent            Kernel + invariant catalogue

      recomputation, validity, exact predicates. Invariant module built alongside,

      by the other engineer.

4     Envelope solver: setbacks  footprint  coverage  plate cap  height. Binding- Envelope solver

      constraint attribution. Rules 10­25.

5     Parking model: demand  area  levels  headroom  supportable unit ceiling. Parking model; 40 rules

      Rules 25­40.                                                                      complete

6     Capacity bands A/B/C. Governing band. Integer granularity. User realism           Capacity engine

      discount. Independent validation module.

7     Provenance graph emitted at every boundary. Class assignment. Derivation          Provenance

      query.

8     Assumption register with perturbation sensitivity. Five-way claim statement.      Assumption + claims

      Deferred-check list.

9     Frontend: plot form, boundary draw, edge classification, results, click-through UI

      provenance tree, assumption register.

10    PDF report + JSON export + round-trip test. CI: invariant checks on all           Outputs

      documentation examples.

11    Golden-set validation: 10 plots vs. 2 architects each. Diagnose and fix.          Accuracy measurement

12    3 design-partner sessions with observation. Write up the four measurement         Findings report

      deliverables.

Buffer: weeks 11­12 absorb slip. If rule authoring is slower than assumed (A4), cut to 30 rules
rather than extending the schedule -- the measurement matters more than the count.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                                             74
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                               v2.0

32.3 Critical path

Metric definitions (wk 1)
 Parameter vocabulary
 Rule model (wk 2)
 Rule authoring (wk 2­5) 
                                                     
Geometry kernel (wk 3)                                Capacity engine (wk 6)
 Envelope solver (wk 4)                                
 Invariant module (wk 3)  Validation (wk 6) 
                                                       
Provenance (wk 7)  Assumption register (wk 8)
                                                       
                           UI (wk 9) 
                                            Report + JSON (wk 10)  Golden set (wk 11)

The metric definitions annex is the root. Nothing computes an area term until it is signed. This
is a one-week, four-person-hour document that gates the entire project -- and skipping it is
precisely how V1's example ended up wrong by 3×.

32.4 What Phase 0 delivers beyond software

Four numbers that size the entire business, each of which has a kill/re-scope threshold attached
(§26):

 1. Inter-architect variance -- sets the accuracy target and the marketing claim
 2. Mechanization rate -- sizes the rule base and the honest coverage claim
 3. Rule authoring throughput by complexity class -- sizes the largest cost in the company
 4. Land-pack completeness rate -- tests the input model

A Phase 0 that ships perfect software and measures none of these has failed.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                         75
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                                  v2.0

33. Roadmap V1 / V2 / V3

Release Phases Duration Capability                                        Commercial
                                                                          1­2 design partners, free
V0    0   8­12 wk  Deterministic capacity engine with provenance          3­5 paying customers

V1    1   +10­14   Configurations, standards, brief, objectives,          Onboarding cost halved
          wk       comparison
                                                                          Upgrade; approval-outcome
V1.5  3   +10­12   AI document extraction with human review               instrumentation begins
          wk                                                              Premium tier

V2    2   +12­16   Precedent, similarity, benchmarking, historically-     Enterprise
          wk       observed capacity (gated)
                                                                          Expansion
V2.5  4   +16­20   Massing, core, floorplate, typical floor (gated on
          wk       architect panel)

V3    5   +12­16   Multi-objective optimization, Pareto, weight
          wk       sensitivity (only if enumeration proves insufficient)

V4    --  --       Second jurisdiction; commercial and mixed-use
                   typologies; IFC export; approval-risk model

Note the ordering of Phase 3 before Phase 2. AI extraction is placed earlier than precedent
because it reduces onboarding cost immediately and has no external data dependency, whereas
Phase 2 is gated on partner portfolio acquisition whose timeline is outside our control. Either order
works; this one de-risks the schedule.

The second jurisdiction is a V4 decision. Every jurisdiction is a full rule-base build plus a
precedent corpus. Expanding geographically before Dubai is profitable multiplies the largest cost in
the business before proving it can be recovered.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                            76
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2                                             v2.0

34. One-Page Brief for the CEO

Why Phase 0 is not "building a calculator"

The one-sentence version: we are not building a calculator -- we are building the machine-
readable model of Dubai development regulation that every later stage of the product computes
against, and the capacity output is simply the first thing that model is capable of producing.

A calculator takes numbers you already have and arithmetic you already agree on. Phase 0
does neither. It takes a plot and produces the numbers, from a body of regulation that currently
exists only as PDFs and in the heads of experienced architects. Before Phase 0, "what can I build
here?" is a two-to-six-week consultant exercise costing AED 50,000­250,000 that produces one
answer with undocumented assumptions. After Phase 0, it is ten seconds, with every number linked
to the clause that produced it.

What we are actually building in Phase 0 is the asset the entire product depends on. Four
things, none of which is a calculation:

 1. An executable model of Dubai development regulation -- rules as versioned, cited, human-
     approved, machine-evaluable records. This is the moat. It takes an architect months to build, it
     cannot be bought, and every regulatory change we absorb widens the gap against a new entrant
     starting from zero.

 2. A deterministic geometry engine that can construct from rules, not merely check
     against them. This is the technical distinction between our product and a compliance checker.
     A checker turns a setback into a test. We turn it into a generator of buildable volume. Phase 4's
     massing generation and Phase 5's optimization both run on this engine -- they do not replace it.

 3. A provenance system that traces every output to a rule, an assumption, or a person. This
     cannot be added later. Provenance must be emitted at every layer, so retrofitting it means
     rewriting every layer. Building it in Phase 0 is the difference between a product an investment
     committee can rely on and a black box they cannot.

 4. An invariant layer that makes it structurally impossible to publish an impossible
     building. Our own earlier specification contained a worked example claiming a tower with three
     times more units than its floor area could hold, and nothing caught it. That layer now runs on
     every artifact we produce, including our own documents.

Why not build the AI generation first, since that is what customers imagine? Because you
cannot evaluate whether a generated building is good until you can compute, exactly and defensibly,
what volume it is allowed to occupy. You cannot calibrate a precedent-based estimate without a
deterministic estimate to calibrate against. You cannot review an AI-extracted rule without a rule
model to review it into. Each later stage is defined in terms of the stage below it. Building them out
of order means building them twice.

And it sells on its own. A developer deciding whether to bid on land needs a capacity number they
can defend to their board on Thursday. Today they have a spreadsheet with a rule-of-thumb
efficiency factor and no citations. Phase 0 gives them a number with a source next to it, four bands
showing which constraint actually binds, and a register of every assumption ranked by how much it
moves the answer. No developer in Dubai has that today. It is a product, not a milestone.

What Phase 0 also buys, which is arguably worth more than the software: four
measurements that determine the size and shape of everything after it -- how much two qualified
architects disagree with each other (which tells us whether our claim should be "accurate" or
"consistent and auditable"), what fraction of the regulation can actually be mechanized (which sizes
the whole business), how fast an architect can author rules (the largest cost we will carry), and

Confidential -- internal working document                                                       77
ENVELOPE -- AI Development Capacity Engine · PRD V2  v2.0

whether the land packs developers actually hold contain the data we need at all. We can commit to
the eighteen-month plan honestly only after we have those four numbers. Twelve weeks to de-risk
two years is the cheapest option available to us.

The vision has not changed. Plot  regulations  standards  brief  precedent  generate 
optimize  validate  outputs. Phase 0 builds the bottom three layers of that stack, properly, once.
Everything above it is faster and safer because of it.

Confidential -- internal working document                                                           78
